=== Fetching Proposal: Deprecated proposals ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/33522

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: gopherbot: add proposal process status box to each proposal issue

==== [Issue Body] ====
Many people filing issues that turn into proposals have no idea what that means.
The proposal process is linked from the code contribution guidelines, but reading those is not necessary to file an issue.
And because the issue template targets bug fixes, adding more to the issue template is not appropriate either.
It would be nice for gopherbot to post a link to the proposal process when an issue
becomes a proposal.

Separately, it would also be nice if there were a clear place for information about the status of a proposal.
GitHub being what it is, with no pinned comments or anything like that, the only place you can put that information and be sure it will be displayed is in the issue description (the top-most comment box).

So probably what gopherbot should do instead of leaving a comment is to insert and then maintain a basic header at the top of the issue description that clearly states the status of the issue and where it is in the proposal process, along with a link to the proposal process description itself.

To start, it would be enough to insert the header with a link to the proposal process doc.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by vcabbage ---
There's also an option to create multiple issue templates. Creating one tailored for proposals makes sense to me.

https://help.github.com/en/articles/about-issue-and-pull-request-templates

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
When I wrote the post about this issue, someone reached out to suggest GitHub Projects instead.
We've been using that for quite a while now, and it lets us show the status on the right side of the issue.
I've also added a link to the proposal process to the description of both the Proposal label and the Proposals issue project.
That seems to be working well enough that editing the top comment is not worth the trouble.
Closing this issue - completed in another way.

