=== Fetching Proposal: Limited use cases ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/36337

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: crypto/tls: Export list of Supported TLS Client Extensions

==== [Issue Body] ====
The clientHelloMsg unmarshal function (in handshake_messages.go) currently exports client information such as supported cipher suites and curves but does not export a list of supported extensions in the form of a uint16 slice. Client extension information is already parsed so this would be a simple mod. Modification of the ClientHelloInfo struct (common.go) and the clientHelloInfo functions (handshake_server.go) would also be required to export this info in the GetConfigForClient callback.

A use case for this would be to allow for TLS server client fingerprinting on the server side using JA3 (https://engineering.salesforce.com/tls-fingerprinting-with-ja3-and-ja3s-247362855967).

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by FiloSottile ---
We don't surface values to the application when there is no other use case than fingerprinting. Not because fingerprinting is not a valid use case, but because it asymptotically tends to require access to everything, polluting the API.

Instead, I usually recommend making a `net.Conn` wrapper that reads the ClientHello off the wire and makes all of the details available as needed.

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
Adding to proposal minutes, seems headed for likely decline.


--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
Based on the discussion above, this seems like a **likely decline**.


--- Comment #4 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so declined.

