=== Fetching Proposal: Breaking Go's principles ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/39064

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: time: Duration String() should omit zero units

==== [Issue Body] ====

### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

`1.14.2`

### Proposal

I propose that `time.Duration.Strings()` should omit zero units.

For example

```go
fmt.Println((5 * time.Hour).String())
```

With this proposal, this example result will change from `5h0m0s` to `5h`.

1. It's more concise. Zero units like `0m0s` is meaningless.
2. Currently, we already omit the `ns`, `µs` and `ms` units if its value is zero, so we should also emit the `s` and `h` unit to keep the `String()` behavior more consistent and predictable.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
Unfortunately, at this point this seems likely to break some existing programs.  Is the benefit worth the cost?

--- Comment #2 by XSAM ---
Well, it will not break programs which try to parse to the duration since `time.ParseDuration` already handle these values.

```go
duration, _ := time.ParseDuration("5h")
if duration == 5*time.Hour {
	fmt.Println("equal")
}
```

But, it will break programs that try to stringify the `Duration` and check the result.

-----

This proposal is a sort of enhancing the `Duration.String`, which makes it more elegant. It may break some existing programs, and I not sure what the actual cost is. 

If the Go team thinks that the cost is not acceptable, feel free to close it.

--- Comment #3 by cespare ---
At work we have a time.Duration printing function that trims the useless `0s` and `0m` suffixes. This is almost always a nicer way to print durations that were provided by humans (for instance, as a `flag.Duration`).

If we can't change the behavior of String, perhaps we could add a new method. (`Display`, `ShortString`, `Str`...? Nothing great is coming to mind.)

--- Comment #4 by rsc ---
FWIW, we used to print just "0" for zero and changed it to "0s" a while back. https://github.com/golang/go/issues/14058. (Not the same as this issue but related.)

It looks like right now the implementation has the invariant that it always prints a string ending in "s" - that is, there is always some number of seconds reported. Maybe a smaller unit, but always some kind of seconds. If larger units can be factored out, they are printed ahead of the seconds.

The docs are also pretty clear:

```
func (d Duration) String() string
    String returns a string representing the duration in the form "72h3m0.5s".
    Leading zero units are omitted. As a special case, durations less than one
    second format use a smaller unit (milli-, micro-, or nanoseconds) to ensure
    that the leading digit is non-zero. The zero duration formats as 0s.
```

It seems almost certain that changing this would break tests, and probably also libraries, and silently. 

For better or worse, this is the documented format. It's too late to change.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
Based on the discussion above, this seems like a **likely decline**.


--- Comment #6 by ainar-g ---
<p>
@cespare  I agree that a function like <code>Display</code> is needed,
but I also think that that function should probably be in an i18n
package.  How about somewhere in <code>golang.org/x/text</code>?
</p>


--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so declined.

@ainar-g, exactly what you want to display changes from team to team and maybe project to project. The best place for this logic is in your own code, or in a third-party library if you want to share it. (Personally I always use fmt.Sprintf("%.3fs", d.Seconds()), but I'm not adding that to the standard library either.)

