=== Fetching Proposal: Deprecated proposals ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/39574

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: reflect: add method Type.Underlying()

==== [Issue Body] ====
### Introduction

The `reflect` package provides at runtime **most** - but not all - the possible operations on Go types.

As such, it is extremely useful for advanced Go programs that manipulate types, allowing in many cases to forgo code generation and/or ugly workarounds that use `interface{}` instead of concrete types. It's also immensely useful for existing Go interpreters, which use it heavily.

Some of the missing features are currently very difficult to implement. Some examples:
- creating new types with methods: @crawshaw [reflect: NamedOf #16522](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/16522#issue-168008669)
- some edge cases of `StructOf`: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/15924 https://github.com/golang/go/issues/20015 https://github.com/golang/go/issues/24781 https://github.com/golang/go/issues/25401 https://github.com/golang/go/issues/38783

Other features, while relatively easier to implement, are still complicated - for example creating new named and/or recursive types **without** methods: @TheCount [proposal: reflect: allow creation of recursive types #39528](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/39528)

One of the missing features is "getting the underlying Type of a Type":
it's a relatively smaller feature and, if I had to guess, comparably easier
to implement. Yet it would be very useful for advanced usages: especially, but not only, for Go interpreters.

To give a practical example, my interpreter [gomacro](https://github.com/cosmos72/gomacro) contains a whole package `xreflect` (~7000 lines of code) to emulate the missing features of `reflect`.
Some hundreds of them are dedicated to work around the absence of `reflect.Type.Underlying`

### Proposal

The proposal itself is very simple:
this issue proposes an additional method of `reflect.Type`:
```Go
type Type interface {
   // ...existing methods...

   // Underlying returns a type's underlying type.
   Underlying() Type
}
```

About the implementation:

it could be implemented similarly to the function `reflect.PrtTo`:
- first, look in an additional field `underlying typeOff` inside the struct `reflect.rtype` and, if non-zero, return it
- second, look for known types. For example, the underlying type of a basic type or an unnamed type is the type itself.
- third, check a dedicated cache `underlyingMap`
- fourth, create it by cloning the `rtype` and removing the name and (for non-interfaces) also the methods
  Limitation: an underlying struct type may have methods due to embedded fields, but they could be ignored - at least in a first version.


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
I don't think that a new `underlying` field is practical.  We've put a great deal of effort over the years into reducing the amount of space required for type reflection information.  An `underlying` field would seem to force us to duplicate the `rtype` (though not the `uncommontype`) for every user defined type.  That would be a heavy cost for a functionality that few people are asking for.  Of course this doesn't mean that we couldn't use some different implementation approach.

Can you explain when this feature is needed?  In general the reflect package tries to provide the functionality that is available in the language.  As far as I can tell the language doesn't give you any way to discover the underlying type of some value.  You can convert to the underlying type if you happen to know it, but you can't discover the underlying type.  Am I missing something?

--- Comment #2 by cosmos72 ---
> I don't think that a new `underlying` field is practical. [...]

The reason is clear, thanks. It can be omitted, and the other the steps would still suffice.

> Can you explain when this feature is needed? In general the reflect package tries to provide the functionality that is available in the language. As far as I can tell the language doesn't give you any way to discover the underlying type of some value. You can convert to the underlying type if you happen to know it, but you can't discover the underlying type. Am I missing something?

My answer is simple: Go specs **do** provide a way to use (not discover) the underlying type U of some type T - by defining another type. Example:
```Go
type T /*...*/ // underlying type U not directly known/available to user code

type T2 T // underlying type of T2 will be U, thus equivalent to "type T2 U"
```

Appropriately, the main use case of `Type.Underlying()` is to properly implement the proposal [reflect.Named #39528](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/39528). To be more precise, the only reasonable semantic for the proposed functions
```Go
func Bind(named Type, underlying Type, methods []Method) /*...*/
```
or
```Go
func SetUnderlying(named Type, underlying Type)
```
is: the incomplete 'named' type is completed, by setting its underlying type to 'underlying', which **must not** be a defined type.

This is exactly the same semantics as the method [SetUnderlying()](https://golang.org/src/go/types/type.go?s=15380:15426#L472) of `go/types/Named` and, in order to be able to use it with arbitrary types, callers need a way to get the underlying type of an arbitrary (thus possibly defined) type.

More concretely, the `reflect` equivalent of the definition `type T /*...*/' type T2 T` above is:
```Go
var T reflect.Type = /* ... */

var T2 = reflect.NewNamed("", "T2")
T2.SetUnderlying(T.Underlying())
```

Clearly, one could argue that the method `Type.Underlying()` could be unexported and only used internally by the implementation of `Type.SetUnderlying()`.

But `reflect` is about discovering at runtime the properties of a type:
if the argument "the reflect package tries to provide the functionality that is available in the language" is interpreted in its strictest sense, then `reflect` should not provide an API to discover at runtime the fields and methods of a `Value` or `Type` - namely, the following should not exists:
```Go
type Type interface {
    Field(int) StructField
    NumField() int
    Method(int) Method
    NumMethod() int
}
```
and analogously for `Value`, because Go language specs do not provide a way to discover fields and methods: a caller can only use them by name, which means it must already know their names.

Instead, such discovery functionality is fundamental at runtime - it allows to write general code that discovers the fields and methods of an arbitrary type or value, and uses them.

My opinion is that the underlying type of a type is a property, analogous to the fields or methods of a type, and that `reflect` should analogously allow to discover it at runtime.
Thus `Type.Underlying()` should be exported, and not merely an unexported feature used by `Type.SetUnderlying()`

--- Comment #3 by ianlancetaylor ---
That's a fair point about types like `NumField` and `Field`.  But `Underlying` still seems different to me, in that you can already determine all information about the underlying type through the existing mechanisms.  The only thing you can't easily do is get a `reflect.Type` for the underlying type--though you can still do that in most cases using the other constructors.

Is there a use for `Underlying` other than to create a new named type?

--- Comment #4 by rsc ---
> To give a practical example, my interpreter gomacro contains a whole package xreflect (~7000 lines of code) to emulate the missing features of reflect.

What are those missing features? 

If the missing features are only NamedOf and StructOf, we should probably be discussing whether and how to implement them inside reflect, not what APIs to provide to make them possible _outside_ reflect. Inside reflect, we can do anything we want, without defining new API. 

It's unclear why either NamedOf or StructOf needs Underlying when implemented inside reflect. (And in any event, they'd have access to unexported fields and the like.)

I'm just trying to understand better specific cases where Underlying would be used _other_ than implementing more parts of reflect.

--- Comment #5 by cosmos72 ---
> What are those missing features?
> 

Here's a list of the missing features of `reflect` that I had to emulate, ordered from the hardest to the easiest:
- `reflect.InterfaceOf`: there is no way to create new interface types at runtime. The workaround is really complicated, because it needs not only an alternative representation for values of such interface types, but also needs to emulate conversions from/to such interface types, and type assertions.
- `reflect.NamedOf` (1/3): there is no way to add methods to types created at runtime, thus no way for them to implement interfaces (either compiled interfaces, or created at runtime - see previous point)
- `reflect.NamedOf` (2/3): there is no way to create recursive types at runtime, thus some parts of them must be approximated with `interface{}` or similar. For example, `type IntList { Head int; Tail *IntList }` is actually implemented as `type IntList { Head int; Tail interface{} }`
- `reflect.NamedOf` (3/3): there is no way to create new defined types at runtime
- `reflect.StructOf` does not support certain cases. Last time I checked, it did not allow unexported fields and had limitations on embedded fields (gomacro can be compiled with Go >= 1.9, so I did not check whether more recent versions of `reflect` package lifted some of the limitations)

> If the missing features are only NamedOf and StructOf, we should probably be discussing whether and how to implement them inside reflect, not what APIs to provide to make them possible _outside_ reflect. Inside reflect, we can do anything we want, without defining new API.

The the API I am proposing (`reflect.Type.Underlying()`) is not intended to provide a mechanism to implement some `reflect` features _outside_ the package. It's just something that's useful for `reflect` internal implementation and, if exported, also a useful functionality for advanced users.

> It's unclear why either NamedOf or StructOf needs Underlying when implemented inside reflect. (And in any event, they'd have access to unexported fields and the like.)
> 
> I'm just trying to understand better specific cases where Underlying would be used _other_ than implementing more parts of reflect.

Well, the _semantic_ of `NamedOf` and its companion `func SetUnderlying(named Type, underlying Type)`, if they are ever implemented, must be defined precisely.
`NamedOf` is quite straightforward (except for some corner cases: should it accept the name of an already existing type?), while there are two main options for `SetUnderlying`:
1. `named` underlying type is set _exactly_ to `underlying`, which must not be a defined type. This is what `go/types.Named.SetUnderlying` does, and requires a function similar to the proposed `reflect.Type.Underlying` to get the underlying type of an arbitrary type and pass it as `SetUnderlying` second argument.
2. `named` underlying type is set to `underlying`'s _underlying_ type. This does not require an exported method `reflect.Type.Underlying`, but does require some design inside `reflect`that achieves the same effect. I have a draft implementation of `NamedOf` and `SetUnderlying` along these lines, and it amounts to ignoring the name, package and methods of `underlying`, while using its other properties.



--- Comment #6 by ianlancetaylor ---
If we don't need `Underlying` outside of the reflect package, then we shouldn't add it.  The reflect package can use an internal `underlying` method if that seems useful, but that doesn't need a proposal.

--- Comment #7 by cosmos72 ---
Well, in the end it is a design choice. If `Type.Underlying` is not added, it means that the proposed functions
```func SetUnderlying(named Type, underlying Type)```
or
```func Bind(named Type, underlying Type /*...*/)```
see [proposal: reflect: allow creation of recursive types #39528](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/39528) - if implemented, must have the semantic 2. listed above:
>2. `named` underlying type is set to `underlying`'s underlying type. This does not require an exported method `reflect.Type.Underlying`, but does require some design inside `reflect` that achieves the same effect.

--- Comment #8 by ianlancetaylor ---
`SetUnderlying` and `Bind` don't yet exist.  It would be premature to add `Underlying` by itself.  We might wind up not adding `SetUnderlying` and `Bind` at all.

If that is the main reason for this proposal, then it should be folded into some other proposal, and not stand by itself.  Thanks.

--- Comment #9 by TheCount ---
@cosmos72 FWIW, my alternative proposal #39717 does have `Underlying` in a slightly different context.

--- Comment #10 by rsc ---
Based on the discussion above, this seems like a **likely decline**.
(There's no need for this by itself, and there are other larger proposals to resolve first.)


--- Comment #11 by cosmos72 ---
I agree it's an addition mostly useful together with [proposal: reflect: allow creation of recursive types #39528](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/39528).
Since https://github.com/golang/go/issues/39528 has been closed, we can close this too.

We will see if the final proposal to allow creating recursive `reflect.Type` (if any such proposal is accepted) needs `Type.Underlying()` or not - and in case I can open another proposal suggesting `Type.Underlying()` again.

--- Comment #12 by gonzojive ---
I'm only loosely following the discussion above. Below is my use case that may be relevant - I can't tell. For the definitions `type T U; type U struct{...}`, is it possible to get the object `reflect.TypeOf(U{})` from a `reflect.TypeOf(T{})`? (Edit: I see per the first few comments that this isn't directly possible today.)

More on my use case: I'm implementing a CSV parsing package that has a function `RegisterCoder(t reflect.Type, decoder interface{})` where decoder is expected to look like `func(string, *T) error` or `func(string, T) error`. There are default implementations of coders for the basic types like `int64`, etc. I would like for any type `T` with an underlying type `U` to use `U`'s registered coder, if one exists and no explicit coder is defined for T.

--- Comment #13 by cosmos72 ---
The definitions
```Go
type U = struct{...} // type alias
type T U;
```
create two types: the named type `T` which has the underlying type `struct {...}`. And `U` is just an alias for `struct {...}`

Given `T`, the package `reflect` does not currently provide any mechanism to get `U` or `struct {...}` - this exactly the addition I am proposing.

To be precise, there is a partial workaround: one could detect that `reflect.TypeOf(T{})` has kind = `reflect.Struct`, extract its fields one by one, then pass them to `reflect.StructOf()` to rebuild the type `struct {...}` - but this both ad-hoc (i.e. relies on examining the type internals and doing different things for different `reflect.Kind`s) and has many pitfalls, because `reflect.StructOf()` has limited support for unexported fields and embedded fields.

Thus your use case would significantly benefit from this proposal - without it, from a type `T` you cannot easily get its underlying type `struct {...}` and then check if there's a registered code for it. The only *direct* thing you can do with `reflect` is asking if a type `T` is **convertible** to another type `U` using `reflect.Type.ConvertibleTo()` - but that would require looping on all the coders registered into your API, until you find a compatible one: possibly an expensive operation.

--- Comment #14 by gonzojive ---
Thanks @cosmos72 for the explanation.

Regarding the above comment by @ianthehat:

> I don't think that a new `underlying` field is practical. We've put a great deal of effort over the years into reducing the amount of space required for type reflection information. An `underlying` field would seem to force us to duplicate the `rtype` (though not the `uncommontype`) for every user defined type. That would be a heavy cost for a functionality that few people are asking for. Of course this doesn't mean that we couldn't use some different implementation approach.

I don't know Go's internals at all. From afar it seems like an extra word of storage for each type or less if cleverly encoded. Maybe you can elaborate on the storage cost if it is a concern.

> Can you explain when this feature is needed? In general the reflect package tries to provide the functionality that is available in the language. As far as I can tell the language doesn't give you any way to discover the underlying type of some value. You can convert to the underlying type if you happen to know it, but you can't discover the underlying type. Am I missing something?

In practice, reflect is often used when the language isn't expressive enough. We use the reflect package to see what the programmer usually sees. In a sense, the language already offers a way to discover the underlying type of T - by reading its definition.

--- Comment #15 by cosmos72 ---
> I don't know Go's internals at all. From afar it seems like an extra word of storage for each type or less if cleverly encoded. Maybe you can elaborate on the storage cost if it is a concern.

The need for additional storage can be removed.

My implementation outline above has four steps: the first three are basically three different caches: useful, but only the third one is strictly necessary - to guarantee that `reflect.Type` is canonical i.e. there is only one instance of each type.

The additional field is the first of such caches, and it can be safely omitted. This is important because, as @ianlancetaylor pointed out, Go tries extremely hard to minimize the space needed by `reflect.Type`

>We use the reflect package to see what the programmer usually sees. In a sense, the language already offers a way to discover the underlying type of T - by reading its definition.

That's a much clearer explanation than mine. Thanks!

--- Comment #16 by gonzojive ---
> Thus your use case would significantly benefit from this proposal - without it, from a type `T` you cannot easily get its underlying type `struct {...}` and then check if there's a registered code for it. The only _direct_ thing you can do with `reflect` is asking if a type `T` is **convertible** to another type `U` using `reflect.Type.ConvertibleTo()` - but that would require looping on all the coders registered into your API, until you find a compatible one: possibly an expensive operation.

Agreed. I tried using ConvertibleTo(), and it's not great semantically. In the case of encoding a type Distance with underlying type float64, it is reasonable to use float64's registered encoder if none is registered for Distance. However, lots of types have an underlying type float64, and it would be odd to use the encoder for, say, Angle, to decode Distance. The two are convertible to each other but are quite different from a type hierarchy perspective. This is where Underlying() is needed in the encoding use case.

--- Comment #17 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so declined.


--- Comment #18 by gonzojive ---
Is there a workaround for this since the reflect API will not be expanded?

On Wed, Jul 8, 2020 at 10:07 AM Russ Cox <notifications@github.com> wrote:

> No change in consensus, so declined.
>
> —
> You are receiving this because you commented.
> Reply to this email directly, view it on GitHub
> <https://github.com/golang/go/issues/39574#issuecomment-655643454>, or
> unsubscribe
> <https://github.com/notifications/unsubscribe-auth/AAAUO54KSVCKMLUUF4A5OQDR2SRTLANCNFSM4N46GNXA>
> .
>


--- Comment #19 by cosmos72 ---
There is a **partial** workaround, i.e. create manually the underlying type with the existing `reflect` API, as in the code below.

There is no way to get the underlying type of a named interface type,
and certain cases involving structs with embedded or unexported fields are not supported.
```Go
package reflect_underlying

import (
	r "reflect"
	"unsafe"
)

var basic = []r.Type{
	r.Bool:          r.TypeOf(false),
	r.Int:           r.TypeOf(int(0)),
	r.Int8:          r.TypeOf(int8(0)),
	r.Int16:         r.TypeOf(int16(0)),
	r.Int32:         r.TypeOf(int32(0)),
	r.Int64:         r.TypeOf(int64(0)),
	r.Uint:          r.TypeOf(uint(0)),
	r.Uint8:         r.TypeOf(uint8(0)),
	r.Uint16:        r.TypeOf(uint16(0)),
	r.Uint32:        r.TypeOf(uint32(0)),
	r.Uint64:        r.TypeOf(uint64(0)),
	r.Uintptr:       r.TypeOf(uintptr(0)),
	r.Float32:       r.TypeOf(float32(0)),
	r.Float64:       r.TypeOf(float64(0)),
	r.Complex64:     r.TypeOf(complex64(0)),
	r.Complex128:    r.TypeOf(complex128(0)),
	r.String:        r.TypeOf(""),
	r.UnsafePointer: r.TypeOf((unsafe.Pointer(nil))),
}

func Underlying(t r.Type) (ret r.Type) {
	if t.Name() == "" {
		// t is an unnamed type. the underlying type is t itself
		return t
	}
	kind := t.Kind()
	if ret = basic[kind]; ret != nil {
		return ret
	}
	switch kind {
	case r.Array:
		ret = r.ArrayOf(t.Len(), t.Elem())
	case r.Chan:
		ret = r.ChanOf(t.ChanDir(), t.Elem())
	case r.Map:
		ret = r.MapOf(t.Key(), t.Elem())
	case r.Func:
		n_in := t.NumIn()
		n_out := t.NumOut()
		in := make([]r.Type, n_in)
		out := make([]r.Type, n_out)
		for i := 0; i < n_in; i++ {
			in[i] = t.In(i)
		}
		for i := 0; i < n_out; i++ {
			out[i] = t.Out(i)
		}
		ret = r.FuncOf(in, out, t.IsVariadic())
	case r.Interface:
		// not supported
	case r.Ptr:
		ret = r.PtrTo(t.Elem())
	case r.Slice:
		ret = r.SliceOf(t.Elem())
	case r.Struct:
		// only partially supported: embedded fields
		// and unexported fields may cause panic in r.StructOf()
		defer func() {
			// if a panic happens, return t unmodified
			if recover() != nil && ret == nil {
				ret = t
			}
		}()
		n := t.NumField()
		fields := make([]r.StructField, n)
		for i := 0; i < n; i++ {
			fields[i] = t.Field(i)
		}
		ret = r.StructOf(fields)
	}
	return ret
}
```

--- Comment #20 by ianlancetaylor ---
@gonzojive It's very unlikely that we would ever support a mechanism for finding `U` given `type T U`.  Even if did implement the `Underlying` method, for `T` it would return the underlying type of `U`, not `U` itself.  If you want to build on methods that way, the normal Go approach is to use struct embedding, as in `type T struct { U }`.

--- Comment #21 by gonzojive ---
Thanks @ianlancetaylor. Is there a philosophy behind not intending to support such a mechanism?

My supposition is that Go users should not make much of the chain of named types between a type and its underlying type. For example, `type Distance float64; type Mass float64` should not be taken to mean "Distance can be converted to float64, but it shouldn't be treated as a Mass."

--- Comment #22 by ianlancetaylor ---
In Go there are two main reasons to use a defined type: to prevent accidentally combining values of two different types, and to define methods on a type.  When you write `type A B`, the newly defined type `A` does not have any of the methods of `B`.  And of course it then requires an explicit conversion to convert between values of the two types (disregarding the case where they are interface types).  In neither of those cases is there any special relationship between `A` and `B`.  In fact in general writing `type A B` acts exactly the same as writing `type A <underlying type of B>`.  So there is no obvious reason why the reflect package should permit recovering the fact that `A` was defined in terms of `B` rather than in terms of `B`'s underlying type.  And, as far as I can see, implementing such a feature would add a cost to all type descriptors for defined types, so we would need a significant benefit that outweighs that cost.
