=== Fetching Proposal: Poor feasibility ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/40860

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: os/exec: method Cmd.String print Env

==== [Issue Body] ====
### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
$ go version
go version go1.14.7 linux/amd64
</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?

Yes

### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?

<details><summary><code>go env</code> Output</summary><br><pre>
$ go env
GO111MODULE=""
GOARCH="amd64"
GOBIN=""
GOCACHE="/home/janisz/.cache/go-build"
GOENV="/home/janisz/.config/go/env"
GOEXE=""
GOFLAGS=""
GOHOSTARCH="amd64"
GOHOSTOS="linux"
GOINSECURE=""
GONOPROXY=""
GONOSUMDB=""
GOOS="linux"
GOPATH="/home/janisz/go"
GOPRIVATE=""
GOPROXY="https://proxy.golang.org,direct"
GOROOT="/snap/go/6274"
GOSUMDB="sum.golang.org"
GOTMPDIR=""
GOTOOLDIR="/snap/go/6274/pkg/tool/linux_amd64"
GCCGO="gccgo"
AR="ar"
CC="gcc"
CXX="g++"
CGO_ENABLED="1"
GOMOD="/home/janisz/go/src/github.com/dcos/dcos-core-cli/go.mod"
CGO_CFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_CPPFLAGS=""
CGO_CXXFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_FFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_LDFLAGS="-g -O2"
PKG_CONFIG="pkg-config"
GOGCCFLAGS="-fPIC -m64 -pthread -fmessage-length=0 -fdebug-prefix-map=/tmp/go-build069442779=/tmp/go-build -gno-record-gcc-switches"
</pre></details>

### What did you do?

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"os/exec"
)

func main() {
	command := exec.Command("echo", "OK")
	command.Env = append(command.Env, "X=1", "Y=2")
	fmt.Println(command.String())
}
```

https://play.golang.org/p/HTmQGJ12Xhp



### What did you expect to see?

```
X=1 Y=2 /bin/echo OK
```



### What did you see instead?

```
/bin/echo OK
```

---

It this is accepted I'll be happy to provide a patch.
Refs: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/30638


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
The `Env` field is the complete environment to pass to the child process, and is often created by appending to `os.Environ()`, so that existing environment variables are preserved.  In that case the output of the `String` method might be quite long.  My shell has 61 environment variables.  I'm not sure that is useful default behavior.

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
Based on the discussion above, this seems like a **likely decline**.
(The noise is much larger than the signal.)
It would probably also break existing uses.


--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so declined.

