=== Fetching Proposal: Existing alternatives ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/41145

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: cmd/go: allow -toolexec tools to opt in to build caching

==== [Issue Body] ====
From `go help build`:
 
```
        -toolexec 'cmd args'
                a program to use to invoke toolchain programs like vet and asm.
                For example, instead of running asm, the go command will run
                'cmd args /path/to/asm <arguments for asm>'.
```
 
`-toolexec` is a very powerful flag to control or modify how Go's toolchain programs get run. The classic use case is for development of Go itself; for example, using a program to measure how much CPU and wall time each compiler and linker invocation takes, or to insert a debugger in a particular toolchain program execution.
 
Issue https://github.com/golang/go/issues/27628 already covers an existing problem: right now, the use of `-toolexec` does not invalidate the build cache, which is a problem in both of the examples above. We agree that that bug should be fixed, but consider it to be a separate issue.
 
However, we argue that it would be reasonable for a toolexec program's output to be cached when the program is deterministic. The use case we have in mind is tools which alter a Go build predictably; for example, a [code obfuscator](https://github.com/mvdan/garble) which modifies the arguments passed to the compiler and linker in a deterministic and reproducible way. Without caching, such a tool is extremely slow, especially for big projects with many packages.
 
The way `go build` handles caching properly for `go tool compile` seems to be to first ask it `compile -V=full`, which shows the compiler's full version, and then use that as part of the cache key. This means that the "package build" operations will need to be run again if the compiler version changes or if the input changes, but not otherwise.
 
We propose adding similar functionality when using `-toolexec`. For example, when running `go build -toolexec=mytool`, the Go tool would run the tool with a well defined version flag like `mytool -toolversion`, similar to the compiler's `-V=full`. If it returns a non-zero exit code, we do no caching at all, which would align with the non-deterministic use cases in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/27628. If the command succeeds, its output is added to the cache key, and proper build caching takes place.
 
We think this is the best of both worlds, because current non-deterministic toolexec programs would continue to use no caching at all, while other Go-specific complex tools could take advantage of the build cache.
 
We should also define the bare minimum of information for a `-toolversion` flag to report. `go tool compile -V=full` seems to include the toolchain's version as well as the compiler's package build ID:
 
```
$ go tool compile -V=full
compile version devel +54e18f1c2a Fri Aug 28 20:01:41 2020 +0000 buildID=DU3bt_lJqYe1kVhgbnOf/1cyl58sUXfIZ9K-RctHM/5cl10_pQMFsyS4FJFGwM/fqivXvY1n7nVWhRpqqqP
```
 
We realise that this proposal is somewhat far-fetched, and the easy answer might be "`-toolexec` was never meant for this kind of use". However, we argue that it opens up a very exciting world of possibilities in Go tooling, especially with tools that closely integrate with the toolchain itself to alter builds.
 
https://github.com/golang/go/issues/29430 is a related proposal, but it also has a very different objective. It proposes an entirely new interface for code rewriting tools, which is yet to be defined. We simply propose to improve the existing `-toolexec` interface in a very specific and backwards-compatible way. We also think both features could coexist; not all build-altering tools will simply need to alter source code - for example, the code obfuscator shown above also enforces some linker flags like `-w -s`.
 
/cc @bcmills @cherrymui @ianlancetaylor @josharian @jayconrod @ianthehat 

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by bcmills ---
The problem with general caching for `toolexec` is that we can't tell whether the tool is idempotent (such as a transformer or annotator or some sort of idempotent analyzer), or intended specifically to measure repeated invocations (such as a profiler or tracer), or even consistent from run to run (such as an interactive debugger with user-supplied edits to arbitrary memory locations).

Tool versioning aside, I think we would also need some way to determine whether the output is actually intended to be cached.

--- Comment #2 by mvdan ---
> we would also need some way to determine whether the output is actually intended to be cached.

That's what the existence of the flag is meant to convey. We could call it `-gocachekey` if you think `-toolversion` is not specific enough.

--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
Consider go build -toolexec myexec.
It sounds like you are saying to run myexec -V=full.
Why are we not running myexec compile -V=full?
Why does myexec matter at all?
What matters is what happens in the tools it runs.
Using "myexec compiler -V=full" would work for toolstash.

I see #27628 and wanting to get timing repeated, but that seems orthogonal to the use of toolexec.
You can't run "time go build" twice in a row and get consistent answers either (the second uses results cached by the first).
"go build -toolexec=time" behaving like a fine-grained "time go build" does not bother me too much.
Maybe for that case you want to be able to checkpoint the cache and rewind.
(Delete all cached results past a certain moment, or maybe "go build -do-not-write-new-things-to-cache".)



--- Comment #4 by mvdan ---
> It sounds like you are saying to run myexec -V=full.
> Why are we not running myexec compile -V=full?
> Why does myexec matter at all?

Both `myexec -gocachekey` and `go tool compile -V=full` would be in the cache key when running `go build -toolexec myexec`, now that I think about it. This is because `myexec` and `go tool compile` are independent and can change their behavior separately.

Running only `myexec compile -V=full` and expecting that to contain both cache key inputs at once is an option, too. I don't feel strongly one way or another.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
What kinds of things do you envision myexec doing that would make only using compile -V=full not good enough as a cache key? Myexec's job should be to run some kind of executable. Would it ever _change_ the behavior of that executable so that it didn't work the way it was compiled to work? (How it was compiled to work should be covered by the -V=full output.)


--- Comment #6 by mvdan ---
The immediate use case is indeed altering Go builds, such as changing the input Go source or altering the flags passed to the compiler and linker. This is how I implemented a binary obfuscator, which I tried to explain in the original post.

Any tool which aims to build a Go binary with altered Go source code would also benefit from this. https://github.com/golang/go/issues/29430 shows fuzzing as an example, since one needs to instrument the code for fuzzing.

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
@mdvan In that case it seems pretty clear that the tool that is altering the behavior of the compiler should be responsible for altering the -V=full output as well.


--- Comment #8 by mvdan ---
That's actually a good point, I'm not sure why I never thought of it. I'll give that a try; please give me a week before making a decision on this proposal.

--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
For the record (because I wasn't sure above), `go build -toolexec=myexec` _already_ runs `myexec compile -V=full`:

```
% go build -toolexec=echo helloworld.go
go tool compile -V=full: unexpected output:
	/Users/rsc/go/pkg/tool/darwin_amd64/compile -V=full
go tool compile -V=full: unexpected output:
	/Users/rsc/go/pkg/tool/darwin_amd64/compile -V=full
go tool compile -V=full: unexpected output:
	/Users/rsc/go/pkg/tool/darwin_amd64/compile -V=full
```


--- Comment #10 by mvdan ---
Indeed, it works. Here's a proof of concept I wrote today: https://github.com/burrowers/garble/commit/308e4aef293d8e14dc5da979874b1c4141ad655d

Unfortunately, via plain `go build` I don't have a good way to obtain myexec's own version. For now, I just do a sha256 sum of `os.Executable`, and add the flags passed to myexec which affect the output. Hopefully https://github.com/golang/go/issues/37475 can be fixed soon, as then I'd avoid the extra I/O.

I'll leave this proposal open for a few more days, just in case this current solution isn't enough for any other tools or people following this thread. For my own immediate use, it appears I don't need any extra features after all, so I'm happy.

--- Comment #11 by mvdan ---
Alright, withdrawing proposal as per my comment above. Thanks again @rsc. 

--- Comment #12 by rsc ---
> Unfortunately, via plain go build I don't have a good way to obtain myexec's own version. 

I don't understand this. Every program gets a build ID, right? It seems like you should be able to fetch the build ID from os.Executable instead of doing the full sha256 of the executable.


--- Comment #13 by mvdan ---
Oh, I was completely unaware that I could use `go tool buildid` on a final Go binary. I thought it would only work on object files. That indeed seems to be significantly faster on a 7MiB binary.

--- Comment #14 by mvdan ---
> Indeed, it works. Here's a proof of concept I wrote today: [burrowers/garble@308e4ae](https://github.com/burrowers/garble/commit/308e4aef293d8e14dc5da979874b1c4141ad655d)

I should note that it does not work just yet, because my implementation was far too naive. I need to first properly read the documentation on what build IDs are (from src/cmd/go/internal/work/buildid.go), and learn how to alter the hashes in the right way without altering the format.

So, it should still work, I just went about it the wrong way in my first attempt.

--- Comment #15 by prattmic ---
For reference, the [comments in cmd/go about calling `-V=full`](https://cs.opensource.google/go/go/+/master:src/cmd/go/internal/work/buildid.go;l=123;drc=d1ce116e409453be764bde7c3f494e7fe1565102) discuss this a bit, though they don't go as far as suggesting that the tool may mutate the build ID.

--- Comment #16 by mvdan ---
I realise that what [my tool does to overload Go caching](https://github.com/burrowers/garble/blob/48dd2263a90b67a2d3997f5b3b1b7cf537a35ea1/hash.go#L54-L88) is in undocumented territory, and that's fine by me - it's broken slightly a couple of times and I've kept up with upstream changes over time. If Go starts providing a documented and official way for me to accomplish the same, I'll switch to it. If not, I'll continue with the current approach. After all, much of `-toolexec` already ties me closely to implementation details of the toolchain, and I'm fine with that.

(I'm going to unlock this discussion briefly just to see if anyone else wants to chip in as well)

--- Comment #17 by thepudds ---
Hi @mvdan, `toolexec` interaction with build cache came up recently in an observability instrumentation context, and I had pointed people at this proposal. 

Just to confirm -- based on https://github.com/burrowers/garble/pull/142 and it sounds like some subsequent tweaks, you've been able to have `toolexec` work reasonably seamlessly (from end-user perspective) with the build cache?

(@felixge might open an issue or proposal about what guarantees `toolexec` should provide, and/or maybe better documentation of what it effectively already does. Separately, #29430 is an older proposal that was partly in the context of the original "first class fuzzing" proposal #19109, where better support for source-to-source transformation was considered, though the conclusion there was eventually to go with compiler-based instrumentation for cmd/go fuzzing).

--- Comment #18 by mvdan ---
Yes, caching works and it's entirely transparent to the end user. It's just fairly hacky on the inside, so it took me some effort to figure out properly. I'm happy to do a video call if any of you would like a demo or have any questions about it.

--- Comment #19 by felixge ---
Looping in @RomainMuller and @Julio-Guerra who are working on our toolexec based instrumentation project https://github.com/DataDog/orchestrion. Romain is planning to file an issue to explain what we’re doing with -toolexec, why we’re doing it this way, and what challenges we face on the way, and for which we’d appreciate toolchain evolution. We might take you up on the offer for a meeting @mvdan 🙇 
