=== Fetching Proposal: Deprecated proposals ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/42420

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: os/exec: add LookPathAbs that refuses to return relative paths

==== [Issue Body] ====
### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

all Go versions affected

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?

yes

### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?

Windows 

### What did you do?

Copied c:\windows\system32\notepad.com into the current directory of a PoC
app as 'calc.exe' and executed the following Go program:

```
cmd := exec.Command("calc")
cmd.Run()
```

### What did you expect to see?

Calc executed from the trusted path: c:\windows\system32\calc.exe  
as c:\windows\system32 is present in PATH.

### What did you see instead?

Notepad (saved as calc.exe in the current directory) executed instead of the genuine
calculator from the trusted path c:\windows\system32\.

This can allow attackers to plant malicious trojan horse software if go application is executed 
in a directory where attackers can write to.  

Example exploits that takes advantage of this issue to achieve arbitrary code execution in git-lfs, git and GitHub CLI (gh) 
on Windows can be found on the websites:
* https://legalhackers.com 
* https://exploitbox.io

##  Proposed solution

If the LookPath function cannot be changed for compatibility reasons as discussed earlier in the relevant thread (https://github.com/golang/go/issues/38736#issuecomment-718836256) 
LookPathStrict function should be added which does not search the current directory. 

This will allow developers to easily and  securely find a trusted path without reinventing the wheel. 
Developers will then be able to  modify the path with:

```cmd.path = LookPathStrict("calc")```

before the ```exec.Command``` call.

--
Dawid Golunski
* https://legalhackers.com
* https://exploitbox.io


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by rsc ---
Instead of defining what Strict means and introducing something that is only different from LookPath on Windows, I suggest we add LookPathAbs, which is like LookPath but refuses to use any entries in $PATH that are relative paths. That is, it only uses the absolute paths. And of course on Windows where "." is implicitly in $PATH, it doesn't use that either.

In essence, LookPathAbs says look in the path to find an absolute answer.


--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
We now have three active proposals related to dot in path lookup:

 - #38736, which removes the implicit dot lookup from LookPath on Windows
 - #42420, to add LookPathAbs that doesn't return relative results.
 - #42950, to make exec.Command use LookPathAbs by default (assuming it is added)

Please try to keep comments on these limited to the specific issue they track. Thanks.


--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
Retracting in favor of #43724.


--- Comment #4 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[declined](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

