=== Fetching Proposal: Limited use cases ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/47398

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: cmd/cover: add flag to print total coverage number

==== [Issue Body] ====
I would like `cover` tool to have flag outputing total coverage that could be then later used in some custom scripts (like in CI).

Example:
```
λ go tool cover -func=coverage.out
slug/slug.go:43:		fooA		100.0%
slug/slug.go:49:		fooB		100.0%
slug/slug.go:106:		fooC		100.0%
total:				(statements)	100.0%

# now in script (could break if output format change)
λ go tool cover -func=coverage.out | grep total | grep -Eo '[0-9]+\.[0-9]+'
100.0

# some flag idea
λ go tool cover -total-number -func=coverage.out
100.0
```

<pre>
$ go version
go version go1.16.6 linux/amd64
λ go tool cover -V
cover version go1.16.6
</pre>

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by earthboundkid ---
ISTM, a `-json` flag would be more general and useful.

--- Comment #2 by bcmills ---
See previously #16888.

--- Comment #3 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #4 by matrixik ---
> See previously #16888.

#16888 wanted to change existing output (reason for abandonment), here I'm asking about new and always stable output.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
I think at this point we are happy to say that the output format of `go tool cover -func=coverage.out` is not going to change.
That seems like a better solution than a separate flag that prints a single number.
(Printing the single number puts too much emphasis on that one metric.)


--- Comment #6 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely decline](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-decline)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #7 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[declined](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

