=== Fetching Proposal: Breaking Go's principles ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48411

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: cmd/go: forward to custom commands

==== [Issue Body] ====
Like custom git commands `git-codereview` can be used via `git codereview`.

I propose the `go` command to support custom commands too. This could allow users to write customized commands which can also be used through the `go` command. Specifically, the proposal is: let `go mycommand` forward its arguments and invoke `gomycommand` or `go-mycommand`, if `gomycommand` or `go-mycommand` exists in PATH.

In a today's example, `go mobile` will forward and invoke the command `gomobile`.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by robpike ---
It already does something close to this: That's what the "go tool" command does. It just looks in a special directory (pkg/tool/$GOARCH/) for the binary. I just verified this by copying `/bin/date` there:

```
% go tool date
Thu Sep 16 10:37:36 AEST 2021
% 
```

If you put gomobile into that directory as 'mobile', then you could run `go tool mobile`. That's not quite what you're asking for, I know, but it would be unwise to introduce a second way to create subcommands.

So maybe what's needed is more policy around the tool directory.

--- Comment #2 by changkun ---
That sounds great but does not entirely address the key of the proposal. The key is that we could drop the go prefix using go command. Assume we updated the `go tool`'s lookup policy, then the existing `gomobile` and a lot of existing `gomycommand` and `go-mycommand` command can only be used via `go tool command`, which means: `go tool gomobile`
This seems a little bit stutter.

The existing `go tool` should continue to serve as internal usage, which is for those commands that are not publically available to users but can only use via `go tool ...` Isn't it?

--- Comment #3 by robpike ---
The `go tool` command is nothing more and nothing less than a way to bundle a bunch of other binaries into the Go toolchain without putting them all in your $PATH. I created it when I became nervous about all the `go*` binaries we were adding to the distribution, polluting the shell path of the installation. There is nothing "internal" about it: it is there to make binaries available.

We could easily change `gomobile` to be `mobile`, just as we have done for other binaries in the past.


--- Comment #4 by changkun ---
That is a good argument, it still looks great if we change the proposal to: allow `go tool` look up commands in $PATH with the prefix `go` or `go-`, and forward arguments to them, meaning`gomycommand` or `go-mycommand` can be used as `go tool mycommand`.

Does this change makes the proposal more consistent with the existing approach in `go tool`?


--- Comment #5 by robpike ---
That's the opposite of what I am suggesting. I am suggesting that we allow things to be added to the tool directory, not that `go tool` look in $PATH.

--- Comment #6 by changkun ---
Adding a command to the tool directory is a Go-specific change and does not empower any few coming commands, it seems too limited. Every time if we'd like to use a new command, it has to send as a proposal. Hence it does not really allow the community-developed tools to customize the usage of the `go` command. The `gomobile` is just one example.

--- Comment #7 by slrz ---
```
$ ln -s $(whence gorename) $(go env GOTOOLDIR)/rename
$ go tool rename
gorename: precise type-safe renaming of identifiers in Go source code.
[...]
```

Works just fine with any command you can find.

--- Comment #8 by seankhliao ---
I don't see what the advantages of putting third party commands under the `go` namespace are?
And based on experience with other commands that do this, there are often inconsistencies in argument / flag handling which degrades the overall ux compared to if they were understood to be independent commands, as well as having a poorer experience with shell completion functions 

--- Comment #9 by changkun ---
A few benefits:

- For daily go command users: customize their own workflow. The benefits are as same as why there is a git-codereview command instead of writing a pure git-based contributor guideline, as git mail, git rebase, and etc. offers exact same feature as git-codereview
- Easy for experimenting go commands. If we decide on introduce a new go subcommand to the official toolchain, then we may lunch it as an external command. For command users, the workflow will be: go install golang.org/x/tools/cmd/goxyz, then use `go tool xyz`. Whenever in the future we want to promote the external command to the actual distribution, users can migrate from the workflow smoothly: nothing breaks because go install can still install an old one in CI system, but since there is a native command for that, then it is selected with higher priority.

--- Comment #10 by apparentlymart ---
I could see value in this if it meant that running programs via the `go` tool gave those programs capabilities that they wouldn't otherwise have.

For example, perhaps `go` would put all of the environment variable values described by `go env` into the real environment of the child process so that it doesn't need to reimplement logic for choosing default values when they aren't explicitly set.

For another example, on my system where I use `goenv`, `go tool ...` searches a Go-version-specific directory for tools, and so in principle this could be a good place to install programs whose behavior is coupled to a particular version of Go so I'd know that `go tool foo` will always run the appropriate build of `foo`. (This already works today except that there's no "easy" way to install a new tool into there; I assume that improving this was what others had in mind when discussing potentially using the tools directory as an official extension point.)

I feel much less convinced if the idea is _just_ to make `go foo` an alias for `gofoo` or `go-foo`. I would rather just install and run the program the same way as I install and run other programs, because that's more straightforward, it's clearer what exactly I'm running, and I can more easily rely on features of my shell such as auto-complete.

---

Unrelatedly, I'd note that putting the extensibility at the top level (directly after `go`, rather than after some other subcommand like `go tool`) would make it harder to add new built-in `go` subcommands in future.


--- Comment #11 by rsc ---
It's an anti-goal to make the go command itself extensible in the way that git is.
Closing as infeasible.


--- Comment #12 by robpike ---
You said "closing" but didn't close it. I'll close it.

--- Comment #13 by rsc ---
This proposal has been **[declined as infeasible](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined-as-infeasible)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

