=== Fetching Proposal: Deprecated proposals ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/49268

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: add shape package to stdlib for holding gcshape instance types

==== [Issue Body] ====
I'd like to reserve the `shape` stdlib package to hold compiler-generated gcshape types. Right those types live in the `.shape` package so it won't conflict with any real package name. But that makes generated code look ugly, in particular the leading dot gets escaped to `%2e` so there's a smattering of those escapes throughout the generated code for generics.

In addition, if we reserve the `shape` package it gives us a place to put some documentation, so that when someone disassembles their code and sees references to a `shape` package, they can find documentation on what that means.

Related: #37641


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by mvdan ---
I think this is a subset of https://github.com/golang/go/issues/32819. Assuming we document that restriction during the freeze, then this proposal will already be de facto accepted and implemented :)

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
We've used go.string for a long time for string data. Can we use go.shape instead of reserving 'shape'? 
I've never seen go%2estring - I'm not sure if it's a special case or not, but if so we could special case go.shape too.



--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
I don't believe this is a subset of #32819 btw. #32819 says no one else can use 'shape'. But we might still have a use for a standard library package named 'shape' in the future, and continuing to use 'go.' for our internal symbols seems cleaner than cutting out real names.


--- Comment #4 by mvdan ---
That's a fair point - I wasn't aware that `go.` as a prefix had a precedent.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #6 by randall77 ---
Withdrawn - looks like `go.shape` should work.


--- Comment #7 by rsc ---

This proposal has been **[declined as retracted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined-as-retracted)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

