=== Fetching Proposal: Existing alternatives ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/52775

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: time: add time.AddMonth to add  a month without normalization

==== [Issue Body] ====
While the `time.AddDate` is mathematically correct with the normalization results. The need to add/substract a month in date without nomalization is there in several areas.

```Go
func (t Time) AddMonth(months int) Time
```
`AddMonth` returns the time corresponding to adding the given number of months, increment/decrement years if needed and set days to `t` by staying in the range days of the month added, without normalize the result.


Example:
```Go
start := time.Date(2022, 10, 31, 0, 0, 0, 0, time.UTC)
oneMonthLater := start.AddMonth(1)
threeMonthLater := start.AddMonth(3)

fmt.Printf("oneMonthLater: start.AddMonth(1) = %v\n", oneMonthLater)
fmt.Printf("threeMonthLater: start.AddMonth(3) = %v\n", threeMonthLater)

// Output:
oneMonthLater: start.AddMonth(1) = 2022-11-30 00:00:00 +0000 UTC
threeMonthLater: start.AddMonth(3) = 2023-01-31 00:00:00 +0000 UTC
```

Same if we reduce the date by one month.
Example:
```Go
start := time.Date(2022, 03, 31, 0, 0, 0, 0, time.UTC)
oneMonthBefore := start.AddMonth(-1)

fmt.Printf("oneMonthBefore: start.AddMonth(-1) = %v\n", oneMonthBefore)

// Output:
oneMonthBefore: start.AddMonth(-1) = 2022-02-28 00:00:00 +0000 UTC

// The results should be the same for march 30, march 29 and march 28 for non leap year.
```


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ritikBhandari ---
What is exactly meant by 'normalization'?


--- Comment #2 by ousloob ---
Thank you for your comment, I took the term from the specification of `AddDate` method [here](https://pkg.go.dev/time#Time.AddDate)

--- Comment #3 by ianlancetaylor ---
We have to have some kind of normalization, and in your example of 2022-03-31 minus one month, you can see that happening, in that we don't wind up with 2022-02-31.  I think that what you are suggesting is that if `AddMonth` produces a date that is past the end of the new month, we normalize by returning the last day of that month.

--- Comment #4 by ousloob ---
Yes exactly @ianlancetaylor. This could be practical to have that in addition of `AddDate`, there are certain areas where we consider each month separately.

--- Comment #5 by mpx ---
I tend to find the need to add months/years indicates that a "civil time" representation may be better "instant time" (`time.Time`). Eg, here is a public civil time implementation: [cloud.google.com/go/civil.Date](https://pkg.go.dev/cloud.google.com/go/civil#Date). This package may not handle a particular use case, more of a general comment about considering whether civil or instant time is most appropriate.

[time.Date](https://pkg.go.dev/time#Date) already normalizes out of range days into the next month (eg, October 32 converts to November 1). It would be confusing to have 2 different conversations within the `time` package. Custom normalisation may be better handled outside the standard library.

--- Comment #6 by rsc ---
I would expect that AddDate and AddMonth would do the same thing with what look like equivalent parameter lists. 
One should not normalize differently from the other. 

#19700 is the proposal (unprocessed) for civil time generally.


--- Comment #7 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #8 by fxrlv ---
Why not use AddDate?
```go
func AddMonth(t time.Time, m int) time.Time {
	x := t.AddDate(0, m, 0)
	if d := x.Day(); d != t.Day() {
		return x.AddDate(0, 0, -d)
	}
	return x
}
```

--- Comment #9 by ousloob ---
Thank you for your comments. 
Yes since `time.day()` with a value of zero represents the last day of the previous month, it will be easy to achieve that.

Sames as you, I don't expecting different behaviour for using `AddDate` in Go, it's just strange to say, the last month of march, 31 is march, 03.
Like Ian said we have to have some kind of normalization for the days, even for other calendars than gregorian. All calendars contains 12 months, lunar month contains between 29 and 30 days, solar month contains 30 and 31 days, adding the regulations.

After reflexion, I feel like `AddDate` is very complete, unless if someone has something to add, we may close the proposal.



--- Comment #10 by rsc ---

This proposal has been **[declined as retracted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined-as-retracted)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

