=== Fetching Proposal: Breaking Go's principles ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/31933

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: crypto/tls: support DHE

==== [Issue Body] ====
<!-- Please answer these questions before submitting your issue. Thanks! -->

### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
$ go version
go1.9.2

</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?
 Yes 


### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?

<details><summary><code>go env</code> Output</summary><br><pre>
$ go env

linux/amd64
</pre></details>

### What did you do?

Work for NOKIA and we are planning to develop API Gateway with go for Telecom Apps.
 
<!--
If possible, provide a recipe for reproducing the error.
A complete runnable program is good.
A link on play.golang.org is best.
-->



### What did you expect to see?

We want that go-lang to support following cipher suites as well. I have read one reply that DHE is slow and support is dis-continued in browser but I think now go is not only about browser but because of cloud-native drive even telecom clouds will use REST based apps and I see that go plays important role as it has enriched eco-system. The traditional model use openssl and it supports all these ciphers already. I want to see go-lang also be in par with  openssl as it shall not just about Browsers anymore :-) 

For Telco Cloud Apps these are still good to have instead of just only ECDHE as to be feature-Parity.  I assume K8S [ which also seems in go ]  and creating foot-prints in telco cloud having such support in golang is not only good but also appears more like "shall have "  :-) 


TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256 (DH 2048)
TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA256 (DH 2048)
TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA (DH 2048)
TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384 (DH 2048)
TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA256 (DH 2048)
TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA (DH 2048)
TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA256 (RSA 2048) 


### What did you see instead?

No Support for DHE 



==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by dominikh ---
> The traditional model use openssl and it supports all these ciphers already. I want to see go-lang also be in par with openssl as it shall not just about Browsers anymore

> For Telco Cloud Apps these are still good to have instead of just only ECDHE as to be feature-Parity

Feature parity in itself isn't a goal. What stops "Telco Cloud" from using modern ciphers instead?

--- Comment #2 by swanandt ---
Hi

I think the point is not more specifically about feature parity but more
about accommodative solution offering.

If some solution offers only latest the vast investment and vast volume of
solution on the field can be invalidated because of new better ciphers.

Even if you check openssl which is more like standard for crypto also did
not invalidated these ciphers ....

I see this way go is going to be more accommodative like openssl and enrich
further it's offering in crypto package...

I see there was one fork made in some earlier response for such request but
I think it will be better if such support can be added natively from go
lang community...

Also how much is the effort do you see to add it...

Thanks in advance
Swan

On Thu, 9 May, 2019, 18:28 Dominik Honnef, <notifications@github.com> wrote:

> The traditional model use openssl and it supports all these ciphers
> already. I want to see go-lang also be in par with openssl as it shall not
> just about Browsers anymore
>
> For Telco Cloud Apps these are still good to have instead of just only
> ECDHE as to be feature-Parity
>
> Feature parity in itself isn't a goal. What stops "Telco Cloud" from using
> modern ciphers instead?
>
> —
> You are receiving this because you authored the thread.
> Reply to this email directly, view it on GitHub
> <https://github.com/golang/go/issues/31933#issuecomment-490891770>, or mute
> the thread
> <https://github.com/notifications/unsubscribe-auth/ALI63UW26DQCJK6JB6LKXADPUQNVPANCNFSM4HLX36BA>
> .
>


--- Comment #3 by jamie-digital ---
OpenSSL has historically implemented almost every available feature, which has resulted in a bloated and complex implementation with several vulnerabilities. Go is taking the approach of implementing the (slightly more than minimum) necessary functionality to be useful so that the codebase is reasonably easy to understand and thus much less likely to be vulnerable.

DHE as implemented in TLS is a massive footgun, as there's no enforced standardisation of groups. I think there would need to be a pretty compelling reason to add new functionality which is arguably less secure than what's already present.

--- Comment #4 by swanandt ---
Hi 

The more compelling reason, I can think is ROI for each customer who has vast volumes of deployment. If the new solution completely makes them unusable then it is big business loss to them and cant compel  upgrade if they dont wish to . For telco eco-system it is more a "business loss" 

I have few questions now 
Q:  If no TLS Config is not passed to go-lang net/http Server which uses ListenAndServeTLS, will it accept the client connection with ciphers not mentioned in cipher_suites ?

Q: If we still wish to add support for 
DHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384
DHE-RSA-AES256-SHA256  
DHE-RSA-AES256-SHA     
AES256-GCM-SHA384      
AES256-SHA256          
AES256-SHA             
DHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256
DHE-RSA-AES128-SHA256  
DHE-RSA-AES128-SHA     
AES128-GCM-SHA256      
AES128-SHA256          
AES128-SHA             

What does it mean ?  only adding those constants  and test stub for it OR 
It means complex implementation for these apart from what you already have in crypto/tls ?

Q:  As I mentioned about the business case, do you have any suggestion what is best way to do it if we still wish to lock on crypto/tls or move to other fork  ?

Q:  Also if we set following flag to false will the clients preferred list will be used and basically override default ciphers-suite  of Server which is using crypto/tls package ?  Can using this flag we can support what I have mentioned above ?
 PreferServerCipherSuites 











Thanks 
Swan




--- Comment #5 by swanandt ---
Any Comments on above questions ??  Can we use external TLS stack with net/http ?  



--- Comment #6 by jamie-digital ---
Provided the external TLS stack has the same overall behaviour (transparently and automatically performing a handshake) and has a `net.Listener` interface then you can use it easily enough with a server:

```go
srv := &http.Server{ /* ... */ }
ln, err := tls.Listen( /* ... */ )
if err != nil { /* handle error */ }
srv.Serve(ln)
```

Supporting an external TLS stack with an HTTP client would be a little more involved but you'd essentially create a new `http.Transport` and override `DialTLS` with a function dialing using the TLS package.

--- Comment #7 by swanandt ---
Our source Code is something like 


	 s.server = &http.Server{ Addr:         address, Handler:      handler,
		ReadTimeout:  s.globalConfig.RespondingTimeouts.ReadTimeout,
		WriteTimeout: s.globalConfig.RespondingTimeouts.WriteTimeout,
		IdleTimeout:  s.globalConfig.RespondingTimeouts.IdleTimeout,
	}
	listener, err := net.Listen("tcp4", address
	....
	...
    s.server.ServeTLS(listener, s.globalConfig.TLS.CertFile, s.globalConfig.TLS.KeyFile)

We are not using tls.Config which is part of http Server Structure member.

Q:  If in server instantiation if we dont use tls.Config will it still using go-lang specific crypto implementation  in ServeTLS  code  ?
Q:  In the crypto/tls package there is a note " Package tls partially implements TLS 1.2, as specified in RFC 5246" What are exceptions from RFC 5246 which is not supported by this package ??

Quick search results in:
https://godoc.org/github.com/spacemonkeygo/openssl#NewListener

Looks like this can be used as wrapper around if we wish to use openssl TLS stack.


--- Comment #8 by andybons ---
@FiloSottile 

--- Comment #9 by FiloSottile ---
We are very unlikely to implement finite field DH in crypto/tls for the reasons mentioned by @jamie-digital. It's a bad design, very hard to implement securely and in constant time, and superseded by ECDHE. I am also unaware of any clients that support DHE but not the plain RSA ciphers, which we carry along for compatibility (and so we can avoid adding the complexity of things like DHE instead). Feature parity is explicitly a non-goal of crypto/tls.

I am going to leave this open to collect feedback, but it's not at all planned.

--- Comment #10 by swanandt ---
What about my other question ?

"Q: In the crypto/tls package there is a note " Package tls partially implements TLS 1.2, as specified in RFC 5246" What are exceptions from RFC 5246 which is not supported by this package ??"

Can you please comment what are the exceptions this package does not support from RFC 5246 compliance !!! 



--- Comment #11 by FiloSottile ---
As far as I know, we implement everything that is REQUIRED by RFC 5246, so we are in full compliance with it. There is no list of what's not implemented, but what is implemented is documented at https://golang.org/pkg/crypto/tls.

If you have other questions unrelated to this proposal, please open a new issue or see https://golang.org/wiki/Questions.

--- Comment #12 by swanandt ---
Thanks for quick response, I would  then suggest it is better to change the documentation to reflect it else it's kind of misleading as it is first thing be read in the Overview Section of this package documentation itself 


--- Comment #13 by jamie-digital ---
I think it's fair to say that the package "partially" implements TLS 1.2 in that it doesn't implement the entirety of RFC 5246. There are _optional_ features left unimplemented, such as the DHE key exchange (which is why we're having this discussion), server-initiated renegotiation, signatures using MD-5, and so on.

--- Comment #14 by ALTree ---
> I would then suggest it is better to change the documentation to reflect it else it's kind of misleading as it is first thing be read in the Overview Section of this package documentation itself

Thanks for the suggestion. I've opened issue  #32079 to track this.

--- Comment #15 by rsc ---
Based on the discussion above and the lack of activity, this seems like a **likely decline**.


--- Comment #16 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so declining.

