=== Fetching Proposal: Breaking Go's principles ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/35061

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: net: add LookupSOA function

==== [Issue Body] ====
### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
$ go version
go version go1.13 linux/amd64
</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?
Yes


### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?

<details><summary><code>go env</code> Output</summary><br><pre>
$ go env | egrep "GOARCH|GOOS"
GOARCH="amd64"
GOOS="linux"

</pre></details>

### What did you do?
Looked at source of net package under the `net.go` file



### What did you expect to see?
`LookupSOA` functions


### What did you see instead?
Not implemented, I am interested in helping implement this based on the other helpers such as `LookupIP` if these just haven't been implemented yet


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/202599 mentions this issue: `net: Add LookupSOA methods`

--- Comment #2 by ianlancetaylor ---
This is new API so I've turned it into a proposal.

I wonder if this should be in the x/net package somewhere.

--- Comment #3 by thatnerdjosh ---
@ianlancetaylor should we also move unused DNS related functions such as `LookupTXT`? There may be others as well

There is https://godoc.org/golang.org/x/net/dns/dnsmessage, maybe it can go in x/net/dns somewhere?

I understand the goal is to keep stdlib as minimal as possible

--- Comment #4 by ianlancetaylor ---
We can't move any existing functions.  I'm just not sure whether any news ones are needed.

--- Comment #5 by thatnerdjosh ---
Ok, should I close this issue and find an alternate solution or does this mean we are waiting :)

--- Comment #6 by ianlancetaylor ---
This issue is currently a proposal and the proposal review committee will look at it.

It's kind of up to you how you want to proceed.

--- Comment #7 by thatnerdjosh ---
I am fine with whichever direction is decided, I will leave this open til there is a decision

--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
There are many _many_ DNS record types. We can't support all of them in package net.
We support the ones that have seemed the most necessary for end-user (non-DNS) programs, 
that is programs doing something other than DNS.
SOA records seem to be needed exclusively by programs whose domain is DNS itself.
That would suggest we should not support them in package net.
We are also reluctant to add more code in x/net/dns without an active maintainer,
and this is something that can be provided by an external library just as easily.
See for example https://github.com/miekg/dns.


--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
Based on the discussion above, this seems like a **likely decline**.


--- Comment #10 by thatnerdjosh ---
@rsc in this case, I have no objections on this, I was expecting this would likely get declined after conversation with others anyhow :)

--- Comment #11 by thatnerdjosh ---
Reopening until/if a decline is final

--- Comment #12 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so declined.

