=== Fetching Proposal: Breaking Go's principles ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/36681

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: cmd/vet: flag accidental integer division inside float casts

==== [Issue Body] ====
We have caught bugs of the form seen in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/83132#pullrequestreview-346205014 a number of times in Kubernetes — namely, code that writes `float64(some_int / another_int)` when what is clearly meant is `float64(some_int) / another_int`.

It strikes me that the likelihood that anyone would ever intentionally lose precision with an integer divison and then cast the known-to-be-integral result to `float64` is not necessarily exactly zero, but very low. In the rare cases where that is what's desired, it's easy to replace `f := float64(a/b)` with `t := a/b; f := float64(t)` and doing so more clearly communicates the intentional truncation.

The proposal is to have `go vet` flag expressions of the form `float32(x / y)` or `float64(x / y)` where `x` and `y` are expressions yielding a result of integral type.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
I'm not convinced that `float64(a / b)` is always an error for integer `a` and `b`.  It would be interesting to hear how many times such a check fired on the whole Kubernetes repo.

Basically I'm not sure this rises to the level of a vet check, which is a fairly high level.  It might be more appropriate for some other checker.

--- Comment #2 by josharian ---
cc @dominikh @mvdan 



--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
Adopting this check would mean forcing people to write float64(int(a/b)) for integer a, b to express "no I really mean what the code says". That's pretty unfortunate. In general we do assume that people write what they mean. Vet flags obvious mistakes, but this is not an obvious mistake. There is a way to write an integer divide and a way to write a float divide. Both are reasonable in different circumstances. 

Note cmd/vet/README's "Precision" requirement, in particular that a check must not have a significant number of false positives. To move forward with this, we'd need evidence that essentially _all_ instances of float64(a/b) are bugs.


--- Comment #4 by rsc ---
We need evidence to move forward with this, and we don't have any evidence. This seems like a **likely decline**.

I also note that [staticcheck](https://staticcheck.io/docs/checks) doesn't check this either.


--- Comment #5 by jktomer ---
Sorry for the delay.

I mocked up a [check](https://gist.github.com/jktomer/cdbc04986f513ccc5b3b3d0e81f1edbf) to run over the k8s codebase, and came back with [five hits](https://gist.github.com/jktomer/714ecddde43123f62adcd3d654c6867a), of which four are copies of each other (and harmless, if silly, since in context it amounts to `float64((2 * some int) / 2)`) and the other is definitely a bug.

This is possibly a slight underestimate since I was only looking for literal float{32,64} casts and there could be some other type with an underlying float type, but I'll accept that this doesn't meet the quality bar for a `go vet` check. Thanks for the review, though!

--- Comment #6 by ianlancetaylor ---
Even `time.Second / time.Nanosecond` is OK, since the time package ensures that there is an integral number of nanoseconds in a second.

--- Comment #7 by dominikh ---
> I also note that [staticcheck](https://staticcheck.io/docs/checks) doesn't check this either.

Correct, I share your concern about false positives.

Staticcheck has a related check, however, which flags `math.Ceil(float64(<integer expression>))` (and identically for math.Floor). This catches one of the common instances of the mistake, with no real false positives to my knowledge. However, that check likely doesn't meet vet's frequency criterion.

--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
Thanks for taking the time to dig up numbers.
No change in consensus, so declining.

