=== Fetching Proposal: Poor feasibility ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/44649

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: cmd/go: introduce 'module GOPATH' to allow transition from GOPATH to modules

==== [Issue Body] ====
In versions of Go before modules, users were able to set up a single `GOPATH` containing a group of interdependent packages. With the advent of modules, a single module may contain multiple interdependent packages. However, all of those packages must share the same import-path prefix, which is the module path declared in the main module's `go.mod` file.

For some users — especially hobbyists who did not publish their code for external use — the process of migrating from this “global” namespace to the “local” namespaces of modules can be burdensome. (See, for example, the various discussions in #37755 and #44347.)

When we started using modules to manage the vendored dependencies of the Go standard library itself (#30241), we created a special `std` module which, unlike all other modules so far, _does not_ add an import-path prefix to the packages it contains.

It recently occurred to me that we could use this same approach to allow “tinkering” users to more easily convert their `GOPATH` workspace to work in module mode.

For such a module:

* The `go.mod` file would explicitly indicate that the user wants a module with no import-path prefix, perhaps by declaring a distinguished module path (`module GOPATH` or `module src`?) or using a special directive (`noprefix`?).

* Within an unprefixed module, the usual module-mode commands, including `go mod tidy` and `go get`, would be supported.
    * `go get` would add module dependencies as in module mode, _not_ clone repos into the local module as in GOPATH mode.

* No other module may itself `require` an unprefixed module. (This is to preserve the invariant that a user can identify which modules may contain a given package by comparing the package path to the module path.)

* As in an ordinary module, collisions between packages defined in the unprefixed module and packages defined in the module dependencies of that module would not be allowed.
    * However, _because_ we know that no other module may require an unprefixed module, we could relax this restriction in the future. Packages definitions in the main module would always take precedence over package definitions in module dependencies.

CC @jayconrod @matloob 

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by robpike ---
This is clever and would have helped me a number of times.

--- Comment #2 by robpike ---
See #44660

--- Comment #3 by thepudds ---
Hi Bryan, I like this idea, and I very much like the general concept of a gentler on-ramp to modules and import paths and so on. One thing to consider is a graduation mechamism. Ideally, cmd/go would rewrite the import paths and module path in a consistent manner. In other words, something like start via `go mod intro`, and later `go mod intro -graduate <module path>` (though not trying to suggest a specific spelling or trigger bikeshedding).

It would be nice if cmd/go could cross the import path editing rubicon (which might also justify a cmd/go version of https://github.com/golang/go/issues/32014), but if not, some gopher from the broader community would almost certainly create some flavor of a go-mod-graduate or similar. 

If some version of what you outlined was supported, I would likely recommend it as a starting point to some of my colleagues who have written plenty of Go, but who still fumble around when starting a module from scratch. An automated graduation path in turn would help them transition if needed to a working, consistent full-blown module, which is then much easier to expand upon. 

--- Comment #4 by bcmills ---
@thepudds, I think we already have a graduation mechanism: namely, carving out “nested” modules, where in this case a “nested” module is any module with a non-empty import prefix.

That is: at any point, you can carve out any subpackage into a module by... making it its own module, and adding a `require` directive to point the prefixless module to that nested module. (The only constraint on that refactoring is that the new (prefixed) module itself may only `require` other modules that have prefixes, so the process of converting individual paths to modules has to begin with modules containing the “leaf” packages.)

--- Comment #5 by mvdan ---
I used to do the same kind of GOPATH tinkering and I've got used to `module test` pretty easily (https://github.com/golang/go/issues/37641). Paths like `test/foobar` are not too long compared to `foobar`, and they're still clearly not for external use or publishable. Do we need to add a special case to avoid a `test/` prefix?

--- Comment #6 by icholy ---
This almost seems like a re-introduction of the previous vendor behaviour.

--- Comment #7 by bcmills ---
@icholy, the crucial difference between this and `GOPATH`-mode `vendor` is that under this proposal each package still has only one definition (used by the whole module), rather than potentially one per importer.

(In module mode, there is only one `vendor` directory for the whole module, not one per package subtree as in `GOPATH` mode.)

--- Comment #8 by icholy ---
> The go.mod file would explicitly indicate that the user wants a module with no import-path prefix, perhaps by declaring a distinguished module path (module GOPATH or module src?) or using a special directive (noprefix?).

Why not just omit the module name?

```
module

go 1.16
```

--- Comment #9 by bcmills ---
Maybe! But is that too difficult to distinguish from an accidental typo? (I'm honestly not sure.)

--- Comment #10 by icholy ---
Actually, that won't work. Older versions of Go will choke before getting to the `go 1.N` directive.

```
go: errors parsing go.mod:
/home/icholy/src/go.mod:1: usage: module module/path
```

**edit:** but I guess that wouldn't matter because it can't be required.
**edit:** re: typo, I can see it being a footgun.

--- Comment #11 by fzipp ---
> Maybe! But is that too difficult to distinguish from an accidental typo? (I'm honestly not sure.)

```
module _

go 1.16
```

maybe?

--- Comment #12 by bcmills ---
> Older versions of Go will choke before getting to the `go 1.N` directive.

That doesn't particularly matter, because older versions of Go won't know how to interpret a prefixless user module anyway. 😅

--- Comment #13 by icholy ---
warning, heavy speculation:

If this gets accepted/implemented, prefix-less mode will become the preferred choice for non-library modules. Once/if that becomes the case, people will also want to write prefix-less library code. This will become a point of contention.

--- Comment #14 by rsc ---
If we do this I think it should probably be the suggested way to migrate from GOPATH to modules incrementally, at which point `module GOPATH` seems like the right name. But then it should also apply the GOPATH-mode-specific "vendor import rewrites" (https://golang.org/s/go15vendor). And then GO111MODULE=off mode would maybe transform to an imagined immutable `module GOPATH` `go.mod` in GOPATH/src. That would provide a way to keep GOPATH mode around for improved compatibility without holding modules back.

One detail I don't quite understand is what to do about imports of code from GOPATH that is itself covered by other go.mod files. For example if we have 

```
GOPATH/src/go.mod: module GOPATH, no mention of example.com/b
GOPATH/src/a/a.go: imports "example.com/b"
```

then it seems clear that the import should resolve to GOPATH/src/example.com/b/b.go. 
But what if GOPATH/src/example.com/b/go.mod exists? 
It seems like we just ignore it?

--- Comment #15 by ohir ---
@bcmills
> For some users — especially hobbyists who did not publish their code for external use

In non-hobbyist environment editing, bisecting, and debugging not - or not yet - published code happens too. Editing, bisecting, and debugging cross-dependent code staged to production happens daily.
> The `go.mod` file would explicitly indicate that the user wants a module with no import-path prefix

The crux of #26640 and (to the extent) #37755 discussion is not about hobbyists, but about go.mod pollution and induced  thereafter extra chores if someone wants to simultanously bootstrap or debug interdependent modules - not packages! We now can do it by lumping all packages 'to tinker' under umbrella module to be used then as replacement - with all undue chores and import path changes it intails.

As this proposal envisions, code layout under 'noprefix' go.mod directive diverges substantially from publishable module layout. Ie expectation of "a module with no import-path prefix" clearly bars the 'tinkering' party from starting with a genuine copy of production code, be it for debug or new feature bootstraping purposes. First we'd need to refactor, possibly moving interdependent packages into 'an unprefixed module.' Then - if something is ready to go, we'd need to refactor back. This can be, and is, done today. Why yet another go.mod clause then?

> No other module may itself `require` an unprefixed module.

I clearly do not understand this. Your own #27542 begins with a sentence that convey full understanding of the problem at hand: *Many module issues and questions seem to center on editing, testing, and deploying multiple (possibly mutually-interdependent, possibly cyclic) modules. [bcmillss](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/27542#issue-357818109)*

----
Say I have a desktop app `company.com/desk` that imports `company.com/client` module that consumes api from `company.com/server` module. All talk in `company.com/protocol`. How do I work under this proposal if I need to make simultanous changes in all four modules? (*Assume that I need to deploy both server and desktop to stage tests in field. Expect many changes on the way — as it usually happens when a mean heisenbug lurks deep.*)

--- Comment #16 by bcmills ---
@ohir, this proposal is _not_ intended to address simultaneous editing of multiple modules. That will need to be addressed separately.

This proposal is _specifically_ intended to address module migration for existing projects (large or small) that rely on packages that, for whatever reason, already cannot be fetched using `go get`, and therefore cannot be published or consumed as modules _using_ `go get`.

That may be because they are hobby programs, or programs that generate additional code using `make` or `bazel` or similar third-party build tools, or just large private codebases that never needed to be accessible to `go get`.

--- Comment #17 by ohir ---
> @ohir, this proposal is _not_ intended to address simultaneous editing of multiple modules. That will need to be addressed separately.

Ah, indeed. I humbly apologize for my off-topic comment above.



--- Comment #18 by bcmills ---
> what if GOPATH/src/example.com/b/go.mod exists?
> It seems like we just ignore it?

Hmm, good question. Normally we would prune out the nested module, but if we're applying the legacy `GOPATH`-mode `vendor` behavior, then I think we would also need to ignore `go.mod` files found within the `GOPATH` module (and pull those packages into the `GOPATH` module itself).

I'm tempted to suggest that we wire in nested modules using `replace` directives instead, but I think that would make the `vendor` behavior too complicated.

--- Comment #19 by rsc ---
> Hmm, good question. Normally we would prune out the nested module, but if we're applying the legacy GOPATH-mode vendor behavior, then I think we would also need to ignore go.mod files found within the GOPATH module (and pull those packages into the GOPATH module itself).

I think I agree.

If GOPATH/src/go.mod says 'module GOPATH' and GOPATH/src/example.com/b/go.mod says 'module example.com/b' and I cd into 'example.com/b' and run a go command, then I assume it uses example.com/b/go.mod and not GOPATH/src/go.mod? That is, the command runs in the example.com/b module and not the GOPATH module?


--- Comment #20 by bcmills ---
Yes, I think that's correct. If you want to run a command in the `GOPATH` module, you need to be outside of any other (nested) module.

Changes to the source code found in of any of those nested modules would be reflected in the `GOPATH` module itself, but changes to their module requirements would not be. That's maybe a bit confusing, but not really any worse than switching in and out of `GOPATH` mode today.

--- Comment #21 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #22 by meling ---
I for sure don’t understand the full extent of this issue, but I think modules is already very complex, and this seems to add more complexity with yet another variant... I think it is a mistake to add more features to the standard tooling to support legacy style.

This issue is about transitioning to modules. Would it not be possible to write a tool to assist with conversion to modules instead, perhaps with some manual steps?

--- Comment #23 by jayconrod ---
I think what I like about this proposal is that it lets people who are used to GOPATH continue working with a GOPATH-like workflow within modules if their projects aren't dependencies for other modules. I imagine that covers a lot of small projects and examples.

I don't think this can realistically serve as a compatible replacement for GOPATH. There are too many small differences to emulate: multiple GOPATH directories, multiple vendor directories, ignoring `go.mod` files, minimal module compatibility, relative imports, to name a few.

--- Comment #24 by jayconrod ---
> This issue is about transitioning to modules. Would it not be possible to write a tool to assist with conversion to modules instead, perhaps with some manual steps?

@meling That mostly exists as `go mod init` followed by `go mod tidy`, though it may be necessary to add major version suffixes in imports. That generally works for an individual project though, not all the projects collected within a GOPATH; it would be difficult to automate that in a way that would work for everyone.

--- Comment #25 by bcmills ---
A general conversion tool would also have to deal with import paths that cannot be fetched via `go get`. If each top-level subdirectory of `GOPATH/src` has to be its own module _and_ a package in one subdirectory imports a package from another, then they have to be stitched together with a `replace` and a `require` directive. In the general case, that may entail up to O(N²) `replace` directives for `N` top-level subdirectories.

In contrast, if `GOPATH/src` itself can be a module, then no `replace` directive is needed to allow packages in one subdirectory to import packages in another.

--- Comment #26 by benitogf ---
>I for sure don’t understand the full extent of this issue, but I think modules is already very complex, and this seems to add more complexity with yet another variant... I think it is a mistake to add more features to the standard tooling to support legacy style.

Agree on this, but I wouldn't say that GOPATH is `legacy` I think that they are just different modes of building and maintaining a Go environment, In our team we use both `go get` for libraries and code that's not available through `go get` with ease, there are no makefiles and no go.mod files, I also keep public libraries where I do use go modules.

The issue to keep GOPATH has been closed and there's a blog post announcing the removal of it by 1.17, but if this proposal exists and  https://github.com/golang/go/issues/37755 has so many comments (and deleted comments) it would seem that there are more than a few people who prefer the functionality of GOPATH rather than modules.

We have a way of dealing with this, the ON/OFF switch for modules (GO111MODULE), which I would urge you to keep, not only so people can keep using GOPATH if they want to but also to keep modules as its intended and not trying to emulate what GOPATH does so well.

--- Comment #27 by rsc ---
I think the big question here is whether it's worth putting any new effort into GOPATH mode when so few people are using it at this point ([96% on modules](https://blog.golang.org/survey2020-results#TOC_8.)).


--- Comment #28 by benitogf ---
> I think the big question here is whether it's worth putting any new effort into GOPATH mode when so few people are using it at this point ([96% on modules](https://blog.golang.org/survey2020-results#TOC_8.)).

if we take percentages from [this issue](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/37755) it doesn't reach 96% actually most people where asking for it not to be removed, as I said before I use go modules, so I'm in that 96% but I also use GOPATH and I think that many people still do as well and would like to continue having an option to build Go code without dealing with a package manager.

--- Comment #29 by complyue ---
I'd like to add a non-hobbyist use case for the demand, that I used to develop several projects at the same time - a few reusable libs plus 1~3 apps using them, translated to go.mod setup, I'll have to maintain local replaces in several `go.mod` files and take special care to not commit those replaces to shared repos, how burdensome!

Personally I like #44347 GOTINKER the most among alternative proposals by far. As for the special `go.mod` syntax with special semantics as proposed here, I feel it kinda confusing against simpler intuition with the `go.mod` construct. I wonder how the `std` trick was working, and why not to make similar practice public doable?

I would like to suggest a separate `go.project` or `go.home` file as a solution, with syntax and semantics on its own right. But I'm not developing with Go for 1~2 years or so, my knowledge and memory around Go seems outdated a lot, and don't have time for a full proposal.

Update: Maybe `go.farm` is a sensible name, for the metaphor of a place where we can grow multiple Go modules at the same time, while ultimately they are to be transported to the market (public repositories & registries).

Shame on me and it's just my 1 cent.


--- Comment #30 by complyue ---
I'd like to cross link https://github.com/golang/go/issues/27542#issuecomment-819330401 and https://github.com/golang/go/issues/26640#issuecomment-819348741 here.

We need to start talking about the concept for the thing bigger than "package" or "Go module" in tooling related issues, currently the data model of Go tooling wrt source project structure lacks a layer of project workspace, so maybe the term "project" or "workspace" or my personal idea "go.farm" will do, just don't stop at `go.mod` as the biggest unit of Go software.

