=== Fetching Proposal: Deprecated proposals ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/50451

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: all: drop netbsd/arm64 port

==== [Issue Body] ====
The [requirements for a Go port](https://go.dev/wiki/PortingPolicy#requirements-for-a-new-port) include that “At least one developer must be named (and agree) to maintain the port, by making required updates in a timely manner as architecture or operating system requirements change.”

The only builder currently running for `netbsd/arm64` is failing frequently with a platform-specific failure mode that cannot be easily skipped (#42422), and the last activity on the tracking issue from the folks I believe to be the port maintainers (@bsiegert, @coypoop, and possibly @4a6f656c?) was over a year ago — a substantial amount of time to look into the issue even given the upheaval of the past couple of years.

Given the lack of progress on getting the builder to a passing state, I think it is time to drop this port from the mainline Go project.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by bsiegert ---
Sorry that we collectively dropped the ball on this issue. As for myself, with everything going on around us, it has been hard to dedicate the needed attention to this.

I asked around in the NetBSD development community for some insights.

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
@bsiegert, any progress on this? This issue is not so much about deciding whether to drop netbsd/arm64 or whether it's good but just about whether it is meeting the maintenance bar. Right now it's not. Thanks.

--- Comment #4 by bsiegert ---
The current theory is that it is a fixed bug, and/or some issue with the current builder. I was going to bring up a second builder machine before making bigger upgrades to the first, particularly as I won't be able to access the machine physically in the next ~week.

--- Comment #5 by bsiegert ---
I made some changes to the builder and added a second one, as detailed in #42422.

--- Comment #6 by aclements ---
The issue that was causing regular failures on this builder (#42422) appears to be fixed.

--- Comment #7 by bcmills ---
Looks like it's fixed for all except for `release-branch.go1.16`, which is going to stop running builds pretty soon anyway (🤞).

In that case, I withdraw the proposal.

--- Comment #8 by bsiegert ---
Thanks everyone!🎉🎉

--- Comment #9 by rsc ---

This proposal has been **[declined as retracted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined-as-retracted)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

