=== Fetching Proposal: Deprecated proposals ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/51815

==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: crypto/elliptic: Add Sub() method to Curve interface

==== [Issue Body] ====
Elliptic crypto operations allow compute sum of two points.

There is also another operation needed for some algorithms - subtract one EC point from another. It would be great to have `Sub()` (or maybe call it `Minus()`) operation as a part of `elliptic.Curve` interface.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by seankhliao ---
Adding new methods to the `crypto/elliptic.Curve` interface would break [Go 1 Compatibility](https://go.dev/doc/go1compat) and would be a non-starter.
It seems like all you need is to flip the sign on one argument and use `Add`.

--- Comment #2 by anatol ---
> It seems like all you need is to flip the sign on one argument and use Add.

Unfortunately it is not enough, the argument should also be normalized. The fact that users need to implement a non-trivial piece of code for a standard crypto operation sounds like this code should be somewhere in standard lib.

--- Comment #3 by ianlancetaylor ---
CC @golang/security 

--- Comment #4 by FiloSottile ---
The big.Int based elliptic.Curve interface is generally understood to be a mistake, and is slowly on its way out. If we end up exposing group operations in whatever replaces it we will consider adding a Negate method.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[declined](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

