==== [Issue Title] ====
archive/zip: add File.OpenRaw, Writer.CreateRaw, Writer.Copy

==== [Issue Body] ====
If you have a compressed file, know its uncompressed size and crc32 checksum, it'd be nice to be able to add it to an archive as is.

I have three current use-cases for this:
- Repackaging a zip file, removing or adding files, without incurring the associated compression overheads for files that already exist (somewhat achieving https://github.com/golang/go/issues/15626)
- Compress first and include later based on whether the compressed size was smaller than the original, without having to perform the compression twice.
- Support concurrent compression: compress many files concurrently and then copy the already compressed files to the archive (similar to Apache Commons Compress' [ParallelScatterZipCreator](https://commons.apache.org/proper/commons-compress/apidocs/org/apache/commons/compress/archivers/zip/ParallelScatterZipCreator.html))

I see three different ways we could achieve this:

1. Create a `zip.CreateHeaderRaw(fh *FileHeader) (io.Writer, error)` function, that uses the FileHeader's `CRC32` and `UncompressedSize64` fields set by the user.
2. Use the existing `CreateHeader(fh *FileHeader) (io.Writer, error)` function, but have a new FileHeader field that indicates we're going to write already compressed data (and then use `CRC32` and `UncompressedSize64` fields set by the user)
3. Use the existing `CreateHeader(fh *FileHeader) (io.Writer, error)` function, but if `CompressedSize64` has already been set, assume that data written is already compressed.

I'm going to assume that option 3 would be a no-go, because existing code might suddenly break if a user has already set the CompressedSize for whatever reason, but hopefully the other options are viable.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by julieqiu ---
/cc @dsnet

--- Comment #2 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/202217 mentions this issue: `archive/zip: support adding raw files`

--- Comment #3 by saracen ---
Added change that uses option 1 (`CreateHeaderRaw`) because it feels weird to use a field in `FileHeader` solely for archiving as that structure is also used when reading an archive.

--- Comment #4 by ianlancetaylor ---
This is going to be new API, so turning into a proposal.

@dsnet Please add any thoughts you may have about this functionality.  Thanks.

--- Comment #5 by escholtz ---
The project I'm working on would appreciate this functionality for performance reasons. We need to replace a single file within a zip. The DEFLATE tax is high and wasteful since we decode/encode without needing or using the intermediate data.

I like @rsc's [Copy](https://github.com/rsc/zipmerge/blob/24e6c1052c641c534b2627d45daf9ade090c4364/internal/zip/writer.go#L291) implementation in https://github.com/rsc/zipmerge. It might not be quite as flexible as the other proposals, but I think it fits well within the existing API and supports efficiently creating a new zip from an existing zip while allowing the user to replace/delete/update specific files.

```go
// Copy copies the file f (obtained from a Reader) into w.
// It copies the compressed form directly.
func (w *Writer) Copy(f *File) error {
	dataOffset, err := f.DataOffset()
	if err != nil {
		return err
	}
	if err := w.closeLastWriter(); err != nil {
		return err
	}

	fh := f.FileHeader
	h := &header{
		FileHeader: &fh,
		offset:     uint64(w.cw.count),
	}
	fh.Flags |= 0x8 // we will write a data descriptor
	w.dir = append(w.dir, h)

	if err := writeHeader(w.cw, &fh); err != nil {
		return err
	}

	r := io.NewSectionReader(f.zipr, dataOffset, int64(f.CompressedSize64))
	if _, err := io.Copy(w.cw, r); err != nil {
		return err
	}

	return writeDesc(w.cw, &fh)
}
```

Here are the latest compress/flate benchmarks from master at level 5 which archive/zip uses by default (Intel Xeon W-2135 CPU @ 3.70GHz × 6):
```
goos: linux
goarch: amd64
pkg: compress/flate
BenchmarkDecode/Digits/Level5/1e4-12         	    6530	    164347 ns/op	  60.85 MB/s	   40598 B/op	       7 allocs/op
BenchmarkDecode/Digits/Level5/1e5-12         	     960	   1131532 ns/op	  88.38 MB/s	   40842 B/op	      13 allocs/op
BenchmarkDecode/Digits/Level5/1e6-12         	     117	   9673619 ns/op	 103.37 MB/s	   44800 B/op	      79 allocs/op
BenchmarkDecode/Newton/Level5/1e4-12         	    8076	    164681 ns/op	  60.72 MB/s	   41114 B/op	      17 allocs/op
BenchmarkDecode/Newton/Level5/1e5-12         	    1653	    765625 ns/op	 130.61 MB/s	   44283 B/op	      31 allocs/op
BenchmarkDecode/Newton/Level5/1e6-12         	     180	   6408771 ns/op	 156.04 MB/s	   61144 B/op	     156 allocs/op
BenchmarkEncode/Digits/Level5/1e4-12         	    5710	    215617 ns/op	  46.38 MB/s
BenchmarkEncode/Digits/Level5/1e5-12         	     370	   3232511 ns/op	  30.94 MB/s
BenchmarkEncode/Digits/Level5/1e6-12         	      32	  34852520 ns/op	  28.69 MB/s
BenchmarkEncode/Newton/Level5/1e4-12         	    4774	    238334 ns/op	  41.96 MB/s
BenchmarkEncode/Newton/Level5/1e5-12         	     357	   2974790 ns/op	  33.62 MB/s
BenchmarkEncode/Newton/Level5/1e6-12         	      39	  30595764 ns/op	  32.68 MB/s
PASS
```

--- Comment #6 by saracen ---
@escholtz I agree that having a `(*Writer) Copy(f *File)`  would be nice, but as you said, it isn't quite as flexible.

For comparison, copying a file with the patch I've submitted would look something like this:
```
func Copy(zw *zip.Writer, zf io.ReaderAt, f *zip.File) error {
	offset, err := f.DataOffset()
	if err != nil {
		return err
	}

	w, err := zw.CreateHeaderRaw(&f.FileHeader)
	if err != nil {
		return err
	}

	_, err = io.Copy(w, io.NewSectionReader(zf, offset, int64(f.CompressedSize64)))

	return err
}
```

Having `Copy()` would be great, but if for some reason only one solution could be added, I'd prefer it to be something along the lines of `CreateHeaderRaw`.

For the other use cases originally mentioned, I've written https://github.com/saracen/fastzip that takes advantage of `CreateHeaderRaw` also (but I've had to vendor `archive/zip` and include my modification for it to work).

--- Comment #7 by klauspost ---
Implemented in https://github.com/klauspost/compress/pull/214

--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
I vaguely remember discussing this with @rogpeppe years ago, but I can't find the discussion. Any clearer memory, Roger?




--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
My memory is coming back. I think what I remember @rogpeppe and I talking about was the ability to modify an existing zip file by appending new files to it.



--- Comment #10 by saracen ---
@rsc https://groups.google.com/g/golang-dev/c/ZSubqlF2G4k?pli=1 this might be the discussion, and yeah, was related to appending.

--- Comment #11 by rsc ---
Adding a whole new Create method just to set this extra bit seems unfortunate - what if there is a second bit we want control over later? Add four new methods? And so on.

Probably better to add a new bool in the CreateHeader. Perhaps `WriteRaw bool`?



--- Comment #12 by saracen ---
> Probably better to add a new bool in the CreateHeader. Perhaps `WriteRaw bool`?

@rsc I originally preferred this too. The reason I didn't for my implementation is because `FileHeader` is also used when reading an archive too. It felt odd having a `WriteRaw bool` as part of that structure in the context of reads. Is this not an issue?


--- Comment #13 by rsc ---
@saracen it seems like less of an issue than an exponential blowup of create methods. The NonUTF8 field is probably most analogous, although it does get set in the reader.

I suppose the most interesting analogy is whether there's a need to get the raw bytes from the reader as well. There at least we could add an OpenRaw method to zip.File. It's much harder to do that in what CreateHeader returns, because it's an io.Writer.

I suppose another way to store compressed files would be to register a no-op compressor.

Another way would be to have a method on zip.Writer: WriteRaw(bool) to set whether the compressors should be avoided. You'd z.WriteRaw(true) before calling CreateHeader.

Does any of these sound like a winner to anyone?


--- Comment #14 by saracen ---
>  suppose the most interesting analogy is whether there's a need to get the raw bytes from the reader as well.

@rsc At the moment, I believe there's two ways to access the raw bytes:

- Open with a `ReaderAt`, and then use `file.Offset` and `file.CompressedSize64` to access and read a specific section of the archive.
- Register a decompressor and do whatever custom logic to the raw bytes.

> I suppose another way to store compressed files would be to register a no-op compressor.

This sounds quite good, especially since it's similar to how you can handle raw reads by registering a decompressor.

Using a `zip.NoOpCompressor` would need to mean that the `CompressedSize64` and `CRC32` fields of the header are left unmodified when the header is closed:
```golang
zw := zip.NewWriter(archive)
zw.RegisterCompressor(zip.Deflate, zip.NoOpCompressor)

hdr := &zip.FileHeader{
  Name: "file.txt",

  // the following fields would be left untouched because
  // the writer detects that zip.NoOpCompressor is being used
  CRC32: 0xffffffff,
  CompressedSize64: 1024,
}

w, _ := zw.CreateHeader(hdr) (io.Writer, error)

// bytes are copied to the zip archive unmodified
io.Copy(w, buf)
```

--- Comment #15 by rsc ---
The problem with the no-op compressor is that the _uncompressed_ size would be wrong. That would have to be left alone. It's probably a little too subtle.

Given that you can already read the compressed data directly, as @saracen points out, maybe it's fine to focus on writing.

What if pre-filling CompressedSize64 (> 0) in the FileHeader means that the writes are expected to be pre-compressed? In that case CRC32 has to be filled in too, although zero is a valid CRC32 so we can't double-check that. But I believe 0 is not a valid CompressedSize64, and in any event it's not an interesting one.

In essence, CompressedSize64 = 0 means "I don't know, you compress it for me".

**Edit**: I see that this was @saracen's suggestion 3 in the original comment at the top.


--- Comment #16 by rsc ---
@saracen, @escholtz, @klauspost, any thoughts about the most recent suggestion (previous comment)?


--- Comment #17 by dsnet ---
According RFC1951, the compression stream requires at least one block (with the BFINAL bit set). Therefore, it is impossible to have a compressed DEFLATE stream that is zero-bytes in length.

However, the ZIP file format allows for a number of different compression methods to be used (DEFLATE happens to be the most common by far). I think we should think about 1) whether we want to support other compression methods, and 2) whether we ever want to support other compression format that may theoretically have a zero-length output for an empty input.

--- Comment #18 by escholtz ---
I've been hesitant to comment because I didn't want to hijack @saracen's original proposal.

For my use case, the `func (w *Writer) Copy(f *File) error` implementation would be sufficient. I think it fits cleanly with the existing package exports and still maintains simplicity.

I agree that having both `CreateHeader` and `CreateHeaderRaw` does not feel like a clean standard library package.

Is there precedent in the standard library for using the CompressedSize64 approach?

--- Comment #19 by saracen ---
For my use case, `func (w *Writer) Copy(f *File) error` doesn't help, but I can see its usefulness and how it relates this this problem.

@rsc In my original proposal, I'd written:

>  3. Use the existing CreateHeader(fh *FileHeader) (io.Writer, error) function, but if CompressedSize64 has already been set, assume that data written is already compressed.
>
> I'm going to assume that option 3 would be a no-go, because existing code might suddenly break if a user has already set the CompressedSize for whatever reason, but hopefully the other options are viable.

Breaking existing code was my only reluctance to this approach. If we don't see that as an issue, it sounds like an easy way to support this.

--- Comment #20 by escholtz ---
@saracen I took another look at the three examples you originally provided and I think they could all be achieved with a Copy method?

> * Repackaging a zip file, removing or adding files, without incurring the associated compression overheads for files that already exist (somewhat achieving #15626)

Using existing zip file(s), don't Copy files you want to remove. Copy existing files you want to keep. Use existing methods to add new files.

> * Compress first and include later based on whether the compressed size was smaller than the original, without having to perform the compression twice.

Write a new zip file, read the compressed size, only Copy if it's smaller.

> * Support concurrent compression: compress many files concurrently and then copy the already compressed files to the archive (similar to Apache Commons Compress' ParallelScatterZipCreator)

Write multiple zip files concurrently and then Copy files from each into a single zip file.

---

Perhaps this approach isn't as elegant and has slightly more garbage/performance overhead but it avoids the tax of repeatedly compressing the same file which I would expect is the bottleneck for most cases.

--- Comment #21 by dsnet ---
> Breaking existing code was my only reluctance to this approach. If we don't see that as an issue, it sounds like an easy way to support this.

For all Go code inside Google, I only found one instance of someone implicitly setting CompressedSize. The usage pattern looked like the following:
```go
rc, ... := rf.Open()
fileHeader := rf.FileHeader
wc, ... := w.CreateHeader(&fileHeader)
... io.Copy(wc, rc)
```
Essentially the code is copying one Zip file to another.

If we go with the semantics that a positive CompressedSize means to interpret the input as already compressed, then the pattern above will break since `io.Copy` will read uncompressed data from `rc` and write it to `wc` when the latter is expected compressed data.

We could "fix" this by adding a `ReadFrom` or `WriteTo` method that specially handles copying of compressed data from one `zip.File` to another. However, that approach seems a bit too magical and I can see other edge cases where it fails.

--- Comment #22 by rsc ---
@dsnet, I don't think we have to fix this, but we could at least detect the problem: if the alg is deflate and we expected compressed data, we can at least check that the first few bytes are a proper deflate header. That would make the io.Copy return an error. But it is a little concerning.



--- Comment #23 by dsnet ---
> proper deflate header.

Unfortunately DEFLATE doesn't really have any distinguishable magic numbers unlike GZIP, which typically has a 10-byte sequence that is readily identifiable. It seems that the best we could do is decompress some number of bytes and assume the input is valid if it passes that short test.

--- Comment #24 by rsc ---
It sounds like I should look in the Go corpus I have for other code using this pattern. I'll try to do that for next week. Maybe overloading the CompressedSize here is too subtle.


--- Comment #25 by rsc ---
Will try for next time. 

--- Comment #26 by escholtz ---
It feels like we're loosing interest in this proposal and should draw a conclusion.

I don't think overloading CompressedSize is a good approach.

I still like the Copy approach that @rsc chose to use in the zipmerge package. I think all 3 use cases in the original proposal can be solved with a Copy method.

--- Comment #27 by rsc ---
@escholtz, I haven't yet done the scan, but it doesn't seem like it's necessary - it's a plausible example that we'd break.

Re https://github.com/golang/go/issues/34974#issuecomment-659518287, the one thing that would still be good to support would be if you have the header bits in hand along with the compressed form, but you don't have them in an already-existing zip file. (Maybe you want more control over the compression, or you have DEFLATE or an alternate compressed form already from a different archive file, or something like that.)

After rereading this thread now with a bit more distance, I think the fundamental operation is really just access to raw data in both reading and writing. I suggest we add those directly, along with the Copy helper:

    // like CreateHeader but the data written to the io.Writer should be precompressed
    func (*Writer) CreateRaw(file *FileHeader) (io.Writer, error)

    // like Open but the data read back is the compressed form
    func (*File) OpenRaw() (io.Reader, error)

    // helper - does f.OpenRaw, w.CreateRaw, io.Copy
    func (w *Writer) Copy(f *File) error 



--- Comment #28 by escholtz ---
That sounds reasonable. Looking at the package, I assumed this type of access was intentionally not exported for simplicity and reliability. If we're ok with making the package a little less simple, this would enable the advanced use cases we're trying to achieve.

--- Comment #29 by im7mortal ---
Hi everybody!  :smile:
I was thinking about that for couple of months. After long thinking I created my solution. 
I was dreaming to put my ideas in live when I found out this issue  :laughing:
So far I had the same 2 problems in mind
1. How to copy files without Decompression-Compression. 
2. Precompress multiply files. Or compress parallelly

I had different iterations in my mind. First there was something like @saracen mentioned with the similar looking ReadCompres method. It was dirty and monstrous. So far after long thinking I created an ABSOLUTE copy of `Copy` method from here  :laughing: :laughing: :laughing: I even did the same optimization with `writeDesc` func. But  I had my genius  moment :smile: when I discovered that both tasks could be done only with `Copy` method.

I am happy that I still can add my penny here and probably resolve this discussion about blowing up methods. 

We don't need `CreateRaw(file *FileHeader)` method. And probably `OpenRaw() (io.Reader, error)` also. 
It's easy resolved only with `Copy`

Here is the idea
```

func main() {
       // final writer
	zw := zip.NewWriter(bytes.NewBuffer([]byte{}))
       // get precompressed zip.File
	prFile := Precompress(data)
       // copy precompressed zip.File
	zw.Copy(prFile)
	
}

func Precompress(b []byte) zip.File {
	// create tmp zip writer
	buf := bytes.NewBuffer([]byte{})
	zw := zip.NewWriter(buf)
       // write/compress data in
	zwf, _ := zw.Create("test")
	zwf.Write(b)
	// extract file from tmp zip
	zr,_  := zip.NewReader(readerAt(buf.Bytes()), int64(buf.Len()))
	return zr.File[0]
}
```
In this way all compression, descriptor validation logic is still encapsulated(!). And there are no overheads (I think) . We compress data to buffer then we do io.Copy to the destination reader. It will be the same in case of compressing it directly. 

In case if user want to copy couple of files from big zip and keep them in memory. It's again can be done with `Copy`. User copy needed files to the tmp zip and then they needed it copy it to destination zip. 

I didn't think about the `OpenRaw()` method before. There are no much use cases so far. If user need to keep only 1 file in compressed state then them can use tmp zips. Use case can be when an user want to extract raw file and send it directly over http to the client :thinking:  . In my first iterations I achieved it through `Compressor` interface. I copied data to the buffer and ignored error from CRC2 check. It worked pretty well for long time. I will post code here when I find it.

*Conclusion* 

1. The `Copy` method is critical
2. Other methods can be implemented through wrappers without overheads

--- Comment #30 by saracen ---
> I suggest we add those directly, along with the Copy helper:

@rsc 

- I'm not sure we need `OpenRaw`, as mentioned in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/34974#issuecomment-648982928 there's already a few ways to access the raw data. Although, `OpenRaw` is probably clearer.
- Personally, I'd prefer `CreateHeaderRaw` over `CreateRaw`, I think it's clearer that it's a variant of `CreateHeader`.
- I think `Copy` should also be added 👍 

@klauspost's `compress` library added both [`CreateHeaderRaw`](https://github.com/klauspost/compress/blob/master/zip/writer.go#L398) and [`Copy`](https://github.com/klauspost/compress/blob/master/zip/writer.go#L230). Obviously, this is an external library, but it would be *nice* if the API continued to match.

@im7mortal Using just `Copy` does work and @escholtz suggested this too. It's a good solution for many problems, but it relies on either your precompressed data being in a zip file or you first copying it to one. Copying precompressed data from a different archive format would require a temporary copy to a new zip file, only to be read back again.
