==== [Issue Title] ====
testing: move Internal types to internal package

==== [Issue Body] ====
InternalBenchmark, InternalExample, and InternalTest predate the "internal" package mechanism.

Per a discussion here, we could probably move those three into a new internal package, and add a type alias for a few cycles before removing the testing alias.


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by rsc ---
This seems like a **likely accept** given the reactions over the past two weeks.
/cc @mpvl 

Leaving open for a week for final comments.


--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so **accepting**.


--- Comment #3 by tpaschalis ---
Hey @bradfitz! Sorry for pinging, but I'd like to take a stab on this issue if that's okay with you!

From what I gather, we'd like move InternalBenchmark, InternalExample, and InternalTest into a new package most likely in `src/internal/testing`, or `src/testing/internal`. 

Then, to avoid confusion during a couple of releases, we'd also like to alias them to their older names like `type InternalBenchmark = internal.Benchmark`.

I hope I'm not completely off the mark; please let me know if I've missed anything and I'll try to get a CL opened soon!


--- Comment #4 by tpaschalis ---
I tried my hand on this; moving `InternalBenchmark` and `InternalTest` meant moving types T and B and their common interface as well to avoid cyclical dependencies. 

It cascades to more changes than I anticipated, but I'll still open that CL in the next days and hopefully get some feedback.

--- Comment #5 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/247057 mentions this issue: `testing: move Internal types to internal package`

--- Comment #6 by ianlancetaylor ---
@arnottcr took a stab at this in https://golang.org/cl/247057, and the resulting change is pretty big and has ramifications like changing the names of user visible types.  Unless we can find a simpler approach, I don't think we should actually do this.

--- Comment #7 by urandom2 ---
While I find it problematic that one of the blocking arguments is that, type alias documentation is a bad ux and #44905 was closed without resolution; I agree this change is probably too large to justify otherwise, should we close it out?

--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
I agree - we did not consider the references InternalTest -> T and InternalBenchmark -> B.
It does not make any sense to move testing.T and testing.B to another package and make them type aliases.
Let's close this.

