==== [Issue Title] ====
cmd/go: default to & improve -mod=readonly

==== [Issue Body] ====
For Go 1.16, I propose to default to & improve `-mod=readonly`, making `-mod=mod` completely equivalent to `-mod=readonly`.
This would mean that go commands other than `go mod ...` and `go get` no longer update versions in `go.mod`.
If `go.mod` needs to be fixed, these commands would report that error and stop.
And the errors in `go list` should be reported only for the packages that can't be resolved - the overall `go list` operation should succeed.

Discussed previously on golang-tools@: https://groups.google.com/g/golang-tools/c/BRCgqwWLwoY.

This is what I sent there:

As you probably know, we're trying to make Go 1.16 the release when there are no blockers remaining for anyone to adopt modules, including things like "go get -b" which Jay has been working on.

I'm wondering, as part of this polishing of modules, if we should change the default behavior and stop doing so much updating of go.mod. 

Obviously I can justify the current behavior at length, and have in the past, but I think the past thinking falls apart a bit when users make mistakes. 

For example, I was working in a module recently (let's call it m) and had a package (let's call it p), and I decided to rename the package (to q). I caught most of the m/p import paths and updated them to m/q. But not all, and the next time I ran "go build", the go command went off trying to find some other module to provide the no-longer-existent m/p. When m/p is a real thing that exists, automatically updating go.mod to use it makes some sense. When m/p is a mistake that needs updating, doing network work just slows down the real fix. 

Another example is adding an import you didn't actually want. You might copy a file into a module m from somewhere else, and when you "go build" it adds something to go.mod silently, perhaps even changing the versions of existing require statements. In this case - since you don't want the import - it would be better for the tool to stop and tell you about it instead of doing additional damage that you will have to undo.

I suspect there are many more of these. In general, while the automatic additions to go.mod seemed good on paper, my impression is that they haven't delivered the vision we wanted: they do the wrong thing too often, they slow down the compile-edit-debug cycle for typos, and they are confusing.

We already have a mode that reports errors instead of making changes, namely -mod=readonly. That flag does not apply to "go get" or "go mod" - those commands' job is to update go.mod and they would still do that - but it stops other commands like "go list", "go build", "go test" from changing go.mod. If we made this mode the default and also cleaned up some of its rough edges (go list can probably do a better job reporting partial results, for example), that might go a long way to fixing the problems I listed above. 

If we do change the default, it would probably make sense to change -mod=mod (the name for the current automatic updating) to something like -mod=autoupdate, leaving -mod=mod as an alias for that of course.

The command "go get" (with no arguments) has always done a build of the package in the current directory, including downloading any necessary dependencies. With a default -mod=readonly, "go get" would become the way to do a one-time fix-up of go.mod. If "go build" or "go list" fails because of a missing requirement or other problem with go.mod, "go get" would be the way to fix it. If "go test" fails due to an import specific to the test, we'd need to provide a way to deal with that, probably adding back "go get -t", which was the pre-modules way to download the dependencies for a test.

Along with this I think you'd want to change goimports to have a way to say what new requirements it thinks go along with the import paths. Then tooling invoking goimports could present the new imports and the new go.mod requirements together. Users opting in to that kind of automation would still have the option of both. It just wouldn't happen automatically in commands like "go build". (This listing of new go.mod requirements only matters when goimports has exhausted your module's current requirements and is grubbing around in your module cache. When it finds a match, especially a v0, you probably do want to get the version it found and not whatever the go command decides is latest from the internet. So letting goimports specify the new go.mod requirements would correct a sort of race in the current behavior anyway.)

I haven't heard many people suggesting we should default to -mod=readonly before, so maybe others haven't seen the current behavior as too much of a problem. But maybe people just figure it's not worth bringing up because it can't change at this point. I don't believe that's true - if the behavior is wrong, then Go 1.16 would be the time to get it right (and soon).

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by DisposaBoy ---
> I haven't heard many people suggesting we should default to -mod=readonly before, so maybe others haven't seen the current behavior as too much of a problem. 


FWIW, I personally started complaining about this whole magic behaviour as early as https://github.com/golang/go/issues/29452, but I didn't feel like anyone was taking it seriously so from that point on I essentially stopped participating in the discussion (IIRC I was even invited to comment on a proposal moving things forward which I naturally ignored).

Not only do I think the default behaviour is C@#0%, I'm 99% sure it's a security issue (which I believe I brought up somewhere else). If you make a simple typo, it goes out and pulls the package off the internet with no input from the user. I know this happens in RL because we previously ran an experiment by registering a few common typos of `golang.org` and observed people pulling package from it. Those requests returned 404 and was before the checksum database, so I don't know the real security impact but I feel like the fact that it was/is possible to some extent is bad enough.


**TL;DR**

I'm still salty, but IMO this is the best thing to happen to Go modules since their introduction and I support it fully 💯




--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
Another compelling example:

	% go run main.g
	go: finding module for package main.g
	^C

--- Comment #3 by rasky ---
Actually, running go run MODULE is a very good way to have people running CLI tools written in Go. Would that be broken by this proposal for people running in this command in a folder where go.mod doesn't even exist?

--- Comment #4 by jayconrod ---
@rasky In module mode, when invoked outside a module, `go run` can't build packages outside the standard library that require a module lookup. You'll get an error like this:

```
$ GO111MODULE=on go run use.go
use.go:3:8: cannot find module providing package golang.org/x/mod/semver: working directory is not part of a module
```

That was #32027. Before that, pretty much everything required several network fetches, so builds were slow and non-reproducible. We felt it wasn't a good user experience, especially for new users.


--- Comment #5 by myitcv ---
@rsc just thinking of side effects of this change, would this change make a `go mod download` a necessary prestep in CI?

Consider a module which we know to have a complete `go.{mod,sum}`, that is being tested with an empty module cache (a regular situation on CI). Running `go test` will necessitate a download of modules, in order to determine the `go.{mod,sum}` are indeed complete. Are we saying this download will no longer automatically happen? And therefore that a `go mod download` will be a necessary prestep, that itself will potentially modify the `go.{mod,sum}` files?

--- Comment #6 by bcmills ---
@myitcv, `-mod=readonly` prevents resolving new modules, but it does not prevent the `go` command from fetching modules that are already both selected by the requirements in the `go.mod` file and listed in the `go.sum` file.

So as long as the module is already tidy (or at least complete) when it gets sent to CI, no explicit `go mod download` should be needed.

--- Comment #7 by rasky ---
> That was #32027. Before that, pretty much everything required several network fetches, so builds were slow and non-reproducible. We felt it wasn't a good user experience, especially for new users.

Thanks for the pointer, I had missed that discussion. I'm not really happy about the outcome but such is life.

--- Comment #8 by myitcv ---
@bcmills - thanks, I was forgetting we are actually defaulting to the semantics of `-mod=readonly` here, despite that being in the title. Minor brain fade. Apologies for the noise.

--- Comment #9 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/251881 mentions this issue: `cmd/go: default to -mod=readonly in most commands`

--- Comment #10 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/251879 mentions this issue: `cmd/go: let 'go list -mod=readonly' succeed if go.mod is inconsistent`

--- Comment #11 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/253837 mentions this issue: `cmd/go: update tests to work with -mod=readonly on by default`

--- Comment #12 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/253745 mentions this issue: `cmd/go: refactor modload.Import for better -mod=readonly errors`

--- Comment #13 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/253744 mentions this issue: `cmd/go: refactor -mod flag parsing`

--- Comment #14 by abursavich ---
Proposal feedback: [My tests](https://travis-ci.com/github/abursavich/dynamictls/jobs/387506374) running against tip broke and I bisected to find dbde566219336e84360b4a38da10b5f63b19021e as the culprit.

TravisCI lets you specify `before_script` commands to run before your script/tests, which it executes with your repo as the working directory. One of my `before_script` commands is `go install github.com/mattn/goveralls`, which is used to push my coverage profile to [coveralls.io](https://coveralls.io/) but it isn't used by my module.

The new behavior (`cannot find module providing package github.com/mattn/goveralls`) is surprising. Admittedly, the old behavior of `go install` modifying your go.mod is also surprising. 

I expect this will break a non-trivial number of users.

--- Comment #15 by seankhliao ---
@abursavich that case should be covered in combination with #40276 using the side effect free `go install pkg@version`

--- Comment #16 by abursavich ---
I'm aware that there are workarounds. By "break" I don't mean to imply it's irreparable. My tests run against the previous minor release, the current release, and tip. I'll probably use `GO111MODULE=off go install pkg` and won't switch to `go install pkg@version` until after go 1.17 is released.

I understand the reason for this change and the behavior of the go tool is well documented in tip. However, as a longtime go user running tests against tip, minimally sophisticated enough to find the breaking change in the go tool, I'm here to tell you it's not _intuitive_ that using `go install` to install a command would ever edit the go.mod. When I want to install a command, I don't want to depend on its module. I would use `go get` for that.

Side note: Appending a version to switch to "global" mode isn't intuitive or consistent with other go commands either.

--- Comment #17 by myitcv ---
> I'll probably use `GO111MODULE=off go install pkg` and won't switch to `go install pkg@version` until after go 1.17 is released.

If you're running tip, then `go install pkg@version` is the equivalent to what you did previously (because both will take the latest version of `pkg`). 

Out of interest, if you are running `tip`, why would you delay switching to this approach until after 1.16 (I assume you meant 1.16, as opposed to 1.17)?

--- Comment #18 by abursavich ---
> Out of interest, if you are running `tip`, why would you delay switching to this approach until after 1.16 (I assume you meant 1.16, as opposed to 1.17)?

With TravisCI the same `before_script` commands run against each environment (e.g. go version) you're using. I'm running against `oldstable` (the previous minor release), `stable` (the current release), and `tip`. Since `go install pkg@version` is new in go 1.16, I'll wait until go 1.15.x ages out, `oldstable` is 1.16.x, and `stable` is 1.17.x.

FWIW, I think I actually need `GO111MODULE=off go get github.com/mattn/goveralls`.

--- Comment #19 by abursavich ---
Maybe I should take my comments to CL 243077, but we're here for now.

I am a big proponent of differentiating `get` and `install`. However, I think there's an orthogonal discussion about whether certain commands should:
1. modify go.mod
2. fallback to the network

I think `install` should not modify go.mod and it should fallback to the network. If trying to install a command not in the current module, `go install package` should behave the same as `go install package@latest`. This would make it symmetric with the familiar behavior of `get`.



--- Comment #20 by jayconrod ---
@abursavich 

Thanks for the feedback on this issue. We know this is an incompatible change to the CLI. We're trying not to cause any more disruption than necessary, but we think it's more important in the long term to get the default behavior right.

> I understand the reason for this change and the behavior of the go tool is well documented in tip. However, as a longtime go user running tests against tip, minimally sophisticated enough to find the breaking change in the go tool, I'm here to tell you it's not intuitive that using go install to install a command would ever edit the go.mod. When I want to install a command, I don't want to depend on its module. I would use go get for that.

In module mode (and arguably in GOPATH mode, too), `go install` and `go get` have had a lot of overlap. We'd like to distinguish them further: `go install` may eventually just be used for installing executables. `go get` may just be used for managing dependencies in `go.mod`.

> Side note: Appending a version to switch to "global" mode isn't intuitive or consistent with other go commands either.

In short, we're trying to address two use cases with `go install` in module mode: installing executables in the context of the current module, and installing executables without regard for the current module (if there even is one).

Installing tools from the current module is an important use case. In fact, it's one I'd recommend in CI. You could add a requirement for some minimum version of the tool's module, then `go install` that. If you don't want to keep tool requirements in `go.mod`, you could put them in another `.mod` file specified with `-modfile`.

Of course that's not always desirable, so there needs to be a way to install tools regardless of the current module. #40276 is the main issue for that. There's been extensive discussion (and previously in #30515), so if you feel that this should work differently, please comment there.

> I think install should not modify go.mod and it should fallback to the network. If trying to install a command not in the current module, go install package should behave the same as go install package@latest. This would make it symmetric with the familiar behavior of get.

This would make `go install` too unpredictable. What if some dependencies are in `go.mod` but not others? We want module commands to be repeatable: the set of versions they use should either 1) come from `go.mod`, 2) should be written to `go.mod` if something new is needed, or 3) the command line should indicate that it's not repeatable (e.g., `@latest`).


--- Comment #21 by rsc ---
Based on the discussion above, this seems like a **likely accept**.
If you have questions about what it would mean, try running Go at tip, which already has this default.


--- Comment #22 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so accepted.


--- Comment #23 by rsc ---
Already implemented.


--- Comment #24 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/258220 mentions this issue: `cmd/go/internal/modload: allow 'go get' to use replaced versions`

--- Comment #25 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/263267 mentions this issue: `cmd/go/internal/modget: resolve paths at the requested versions`

--- Comment #26 by mvdan ---
@rsc @bcmills this is missing from the release notes still, right? It seems like a big change that should be there before beta1 is tagged.

--- Comment #27 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/268859 mentions this issue: `cmd/go: release note for -mod=readonly by default`

--- Comment #28 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/285113 mentions this issue: `content/static/doc: document -mod=readonly enabled by default`

--- Comment #29 by jdog8541 ---
Man you guys are kicking ass!!! Keep up the good work! 
