==== [Issue Title] ====
os/exec: return error when PATH lookup would use current directory

==== [Issue Body] ====
We recently published a new package golang.org/x/sys/execabs, which is a forwarding wrapper around os/exec that makes three changes:

 - execabs.LookPath changes the result of exec.LookPath in the case where a PATH search returns an executable in the current directory (dot). In that case, execabs.LookPath returns an error instead. The error text is “prog resolves to executable in current directory (./prog)”

- execabs.Command changes the result of exec.Command in the same case. It arranges that the subsequent cmd.Run or cmd.Start will return that same error.

- execabs.CommandContext does the same.

As yet another possible answer in the “what to do about PATH lookups on Windows” saga, perhaps we should change os/exec to do these things by default. I am filing this proposal to help us discuss and decide whether to take this path. (For more background, see the blog post https://blog.golang.org/path-security.)

The proposal can be summarized as “replace os/exec with golang.org/x/sys/execabs”.

To recap how we got here, the fundamental problem is that lots of Go programs do things like `exec.Command("prog")` and expect that prog will come from a system directory listed in the PATH. It is a surprise and in some cases a security problem that on Windows prog will be taken from dot instead when prog.exe (or prog.bat, prog.com, ...) exists. The same is true on Unix for users who have an explicit dot or empty-string element in their PATH.

We already have three issues with possible approaches to solving this problem. They are:


 - #38736, which removes the implicit dot lookup from LookPath on Windows
 - #42420, to add LookPathAbs that doesn't return relative results.
 - #42950, to make exec.Command use LookPathAbs by default (assuming it is added)

The problem with #38736 is that it silently changes the behavior of programs on Windows. Where `exec.Command("prog")` previously found and ran `.\prog.exe`, it would now either silently switch to a `prog.exe` from the PATH (surprise!) or return an error that `prog` could not be found (even though it used to be; confusion!). The same is true of `exec.LookPath`.

#42420 avoids the problem of changing existing behavior by introducing a new function `exec.LookPathAbs` that never looks in dot. Clearly that doesn’t surprise or confuse anyone. But it also doesn’t fix any security problems.

#42950 extends #42420 by changing `exec.Command` to use `exec.LookPathAbs` by default. That brings back the surprise and confusion of #38736, but only for `exec.Command` and not `exec.LookPath`. And compared to #38736, #42420+#42950 has the added complexity of adding new API (`LookPathAbs`).

None of these are great.

The proposal in this issue, to adopt execabs semantics as the os/exec semantics, fixes the problems. Execabs doesn’t _remove_ dot from the PATH lookup. Instead it reports use of dot as an error. This avoids the surprise of running a different program. And the reported error is very clear about what happened. Instead of a generic “program not found” it gives an error that avoids the confusion:

    prog resolves to executable in current directory (./prog)

And of course because programs from the current directory are not being executed, that fixes the security problem too.

The specific changes this issue proposes in os/exec are:

 - Add a new `var ErrDot = errors.New("executable in current directory")`
 - Change `LookPath`: if it would have chosen to `return path, nil` where path is an executable in the current directory found by a PATH lookup, it now does `return path, err` where `err` satisfies `errors.Is(err, ErrDot)`.
 - Change `Cmd`: add a new field `Err error` which is returned by `Start` or `Run` if not set. This field replaces the current unexported field `lookPathErr`.

Consider this client code:

	path, err := exec.LookPath("prog")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	use(path)

	cmd := exec.Command("prog")
	if err := cmd.Run(); err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}

With the proposed changes, the code would no longer find and run `./prog` on Unix (when dot is in the PATH), nor `.\prog.exe` on Windows (regardless of PATH), addressing the security issue.

Programs that want to require the current directory to be used (ignoring PATH) can change `"prog"` to `"./prog"` (that works on both Unix and Windows systems). This change (`"prog"` to `"./prog"`) is compatible with older versions of `os/exec`.

Programs that want to allow the use of the current directory in conjunction with PATH can add a few new lines of code, marked with `<<<`:

	path, err := exec.LookPath("prog")
	if errors.Is(err, exec.ErrDot) {        // <<<
		err = nil                       // <<<
	}                                       // <<<
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	use(path)

	cmd := exec.Command("prog")
	if errors.Is(cmd.Err, exec.ErrDot) {    // <<<
		cmd.Err = nil                   // <<<
	}                                       // <<<
	if err := cmd.Run(); err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}

This should give programs the flexibility to opt back into the old behavior when necessary.
Of course, this change (adding the `errors.Is` checks) is not compatible with older versions of `os/exec`, but we expect this need to be rare. We expect most programs that intentionally run programs from the current directory to update to the `./prog` form.

Windows users, would this proposal break your programs?

You can check today by replacing

	import "os/exec"

with

	import exec "golang.org/x/sys/execabs"

in your source code. No other changes are needed to get the effect. (Of course, golang.org/x/sys/execabs does not provide `ErrDot`, so the `errors.Is` stanzas cannot be written in this simulation of the proposal.)

Thoughts? Comments? Concerns? Thanks very much.


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by DmitriyMV ---
As a part time Windows user, I don't think I expect `exec.Command("prog")` to work the same way as I expect launching stuff from `cmd.exe`. The `cmd.exe` behavior is surprising, but it's already set in stone several decades ago. 

--- Comment #2 by bcmills ---
I don't understand why the `Cmd.Err` field is necessary. Couldn't the workaround program instead be written as

```go
	const short = "prog"
	actual := short
	if abs, err := exec.LookPath(short); errors.Is(err, exec.ErrDot) {
		actual = abs
	}
	cmd := exec.Command(actual)
	cmd.Args[0] = short
```

?

--- Comment #3 by mislav ---
Thank you for the detailed description, @rsc!

If this proposal would be adopted, how should we write the following code so it would be safe to run inside an untrusted directory?
```go
c := exec.Command("git", "status")
s, err := c.Output()
```

With this proposal, if the current directory has a `.\git.exe` or a `.\git.bat` (or a similar file matching any of the PATHEXTs), running this command would result in a failure. Since there might be legitimate reasons why the current directory could contain a `git.bat`, would we have any option to instead execute git as found in the system PATH instead of in the current directory?

I understand that this proposal is meant to prevent silent failures in programs that relied on the Windows behavior. I'm just wondering, if this proposal gets accepted, what are our options for running commands in untrusted directories (i.e. so that the contents of the current directory is entirely ignored)? Might this proposal ship in tandem with https://github.com/golang/go/issues/42420?

--- Comment #4 by dylan-bourque ---
For some additional context, I recently updated to Go 1.15.7 (which includes the security patch for this issue) and it broke build-time scripts that run on Mac and/or Linux systems.  We have a build process where we intentionally `go install` build tools to `<project-dir>/bin` (in order to avoid installing local tools to "global" directories that happen to appear in `$PATH`) and prepend `<project-dir>/bin` to `$PATH`.  We then have `//go:generate custom-tool ....` directives in .go source files within the project, with the obvious expectation that it will find the `custom-tool` binary that we just "installed" into `<project-dir>/bin`.

Unfortunately for me, running `go generate ./...` from the project root now fails with an error that says:
```
custom-tool resolves to executable in current directory (./bin/custom-tool)
```

The suggested workaround is to prepend `./` (or `./bin/` in my case) would work but it now makes those `go:generate` directives sensitive to which directory `go generate` is run from, i.e. a `go:generate` directive in a sub-package would work when `go generate` is run from the project root but fail if the command was run from the sub-package directory.

While I fully understand the security concern here, I take issue with the premise that **all** situations that involve executing a binary that resides within the current directory are invalid.  With this change to Go, I now have approximately 800 `go:generate` directives that I need to investigate to see whether or not they are broken.

--- Comment #5 by seankhliao ---
@dylan-bourque wouldn't using the absolute path to the bin directory be a more proper fix for your situation? 

```sh
# assuming this is set from tooling in the root of the project
export PATH=$(pwd)/bin:$PATH
```

--- Comment #6 by dylan-bourque ---
@seankhliao your assumption is correct.  We do `export PATH=$(pwd)/bin:$PATH` in the project-level `Makefile` with the expectation that `go generate ./...` will find the various tools in that location.

The issue with injecting an absolute path into those `//go:generate` directives is that that absolute path is not the same on every machine.

As I said, it seems like updating those directives to use `//go:generate ../../custom-tool .....` would technically work but that introduces the $PWD sensitivity I mentioned.

--- Comment #7 by bcmills ---
@dylan-bourque, `go:generate` directions should not be sensitive to `$PWD`. Per the [`go:generate` design doc](https://golang.org/s/go1.4-generate), emphasis added:
> _command_ is the generator (such as `yacc`) to be run, corresponding to an executable file that can be run locally; it must either be in the shell path (`gofmt`) or fully qualified (`/usr/you/bin/mytool`) **and is run in the package directory**.


--- Comment #8 by bcmills ---
(And note that we currently use exactly that approach in the Go standard library: see https://golang.org/cl/261499.)

--- Comment #9 by dylan-bourque ---
All of mine weren't sensitive to `$PWD` before.  The commands being run were always located via the shell path, and we went out of our way to ensure that those would be the correct commands.

That is no longer the case with Go 1.15.7, though.  The same `//go:generate custom-tool ....` commands that worked yesterday fail today.

--- Comment #10 by dylan-bourque ---
> and is run in the package directory

I see where my confusion was now.

As a test, I added `//go:generate echo PWD is $PWD` in a sub-package and ran `go generate ./...` from the project root.  The output is the project root directory, not the sub-package.  However `//go:generate ls -l` shows the contents of the sub-package folder.

Even with this new information, though, I still have hundreds of `go:generate` directives that were working perfectly before and now need to be checked and potentially updated to include a relative path to the command binary. ☹️

I think my point stands that not every invocation of a command within the current directory should be treated as malicious, though.

--- Comment #11 by dolmen ---
@rsc This proposal helps for the case where you want to catch the case of a local executable file. But it doesn't help for the case where you want to `LookPath` ignoring a local executable and looking just in %PATH%: this proposal doesn't provide a `LookPathIgnoreDot` and still forces to use an alternate version of the whole `os/exec` package.

Concrete example: In my [`goeval`](https://github.com/dolmen-go/goeval/) project I want to run `go run` to compile a Go source file. `golang.org/x/sys/execabs` catches a security issue if there is a `go.bat` in the current directory, but that's not what is helpful for users. I need instead an `exec.Command` that lookup `go` _only_ from `%PATH%`. I just want the Unix behavior (which Windows user can opt-in on non-Go programs because of [`NeedCurrentDirectoryForExePathW`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/processenv/nf-processenv-needcurrentdirectoryforexepathw)).

_Update_: It looks like my only option is to vendor _both_ `os/exec` and `golang.org/x/sys/execabs` in my project (with the patched version of `LookPath` I want) to get the behavior I need.

_Update 2_:
```
$ GOOS=windows GOARCH=amd64 go list -deps . | grep exec
internal/syscall/execenv
os/exec
golang.org/x/sys/execabs
internal/execabs
```
Do I also have to vendor that [`internal/execabs`](https://github.com/golang/go/tree/master/src/internal/execabs)?

--- Comment #12 by rsc ---
@dolmen, yes, there is no "do a non-standard PATH lookup". There is only "do the standard PATH lookup and refuse an insecure result". As noted above, the problem with "do a non-standard PATH lookup" is that it silently differs from the standard system behavior, which will cause mystery and confusion.

> golang.org/x/sys/execabs catches a security issue if there is a go.bat in the current directory, but that's not what is helpful for users.

Those same users really probably should delete go.bat. If your goeval doesn't trip over it, something else will.

I think it would be fine, as an independent change, to respect the presence of the NoDefaultCurrentDirectoryInExePath environment variable. If that variable were found in the environment, then LookPath would never look in dot and the security check would never trigger.


--- Comment #13 by rsc ---
@bcmills, cmd.Err is not strictly necessary - users can call LookPath themselves - but it is error-prone to assume the result of LookPath will be valid input to exec.Command. In general that's not true, since LookPath returns a clean path, so `go` not `./go`. That is, `abs` in your code snippet is not always an absolute path. It's far easier and less error-prone to apply the check after the exec.Command lookup instead of keeping two lookups in sync.

Also, there are now two packages (execabs and safeexec) that function as exec.Command-workalikes and are hampered in that by not being able to set Err themselves. Safeexec uses a not-as-nice API and execabs uses ugly reflection. Better to expose Err and let any future wrappers do what they need to do. That field (lookPathErr) is the only setup field in exec.Command that's not exported.



--- Comment #14 by rsc ---
@dylan-bourque It sounds like somehow you have

    //go:generate PATH=./bin:$PATH foo ...

Why not instead write

    //go:generate ./bin/foo ...

?


--- Comment #15 by dylan-bourque ---
@rsc what we have are a bunch of `//go:generate foo ...` (no `./` prefix).  `foo` is explicitly installed in the project-level `bin/` folder and the `Makefile` that's invoking `go generate ./...` is pre-pending `$PWD/bin` to `$PATH` so that those directives will find the "right" `foo` when doing the path search.

For a more concrete example, one of those tools is `protoc-gen-go`, where the generated code is coupled to the library code that corresponds to the version of the generator used.  We have lots of projects such that it's not feasible to guarantee that every one of them is always using the exact same version of `google.golang.org/protobuf`.  Go modules is actually addressing that issue for us, but it means that we can't install the `protoc-gen-go` binary to `$GOPATH/bin` because different projects are bound to different versions.  In order to solve that, we have our build process configured to install `protoc-gen-go` into `<projectdir>/bin` and do `export PATH=$PWD/bin:$PATH` in each project's `Makefile` so that each one is invoking the exact version that it's bound to via `go.mod`.

With the security fix in Go 1.14.4 and 1.15.7, we're now looking at having to update a significant number of our `//go:generate` directives to include explicit relative path prefixes (`./bin/`, `../bin/`, `../../bin/`, etc.) for the tool(s) being invoked.

My point here is that we are intentionally placing an executable within the current directory and explicitly configuring the environment such that that binary will be invoked (just like anyone would do in a shell script, etc.).  This proposed change to treat **any** binary within $PWD as malicious will, in my opinion at least, break valid use cases.

--- Comment #16 by rsc ---
>  the Makefile that's invoking go generate ./... is pre-pending $PWD/bin to $PATH so that those directives will find the "right" foo when doing the path search.

If \$PWD is not an absolute path due to some mistake in `go generate`, we should fix that.



--- Comment #17 by dylan-bourque ---
@rsc That (making `$PWD` correct for `go generate`) is the issue @bcmills submitted above.  That doesn't fully cover my scenario, though.  We're invoking our custom generation tools with no explicit path (relative or absolute) and expecting them to be resolved via `os.LookPath`.  Since we're intentionally installing those tools into `$PWD/bin` (for the reasons I mentioned before), the change in 1.14.4/1.15.7 has introduced a new failure case because the resolved path to the tool ends up being `$PWD/bin/foo`

--- Comment #18 by rsc ---
@dylan-borque, if $PWD is absolute then resolving to $PWD/bin/foo will be fine, right?


--- Comment #19 by rsc ---
Except for the discussion around go generate, the reaction here seems overwhelmingly in favor, and this is the kind of change we should land early in the cycle. It sounds like the consensus is to accept this proposal. 

Do I have that right?


--- Comment #20 by dholmesdell ---
My only outstanding concern would be the inability to ignore the current directory in the path search, as mentioned in previous comments.  The primary security issue is addressed by avoiding a potentially malicious executable in the current directory, but possibly transformed into a less severe denial-of-service.  Rather than causing execution of malicious code, a hypothetical attacker's rogue file will now prevent the Go-implemented service from performing its function.  However, your proposal to separately respect the NoDefaultCurrentDirectoryInExePath environment variable would overcome that.

It might be convenient to avoid the new error if dot is explicitly present in PATH, though one could certainly achieve that via some additional application code in conjunction with errors.Is(err, exec.ErrDot).  I don't think that I foresee having such a use case in my own work, and the new scenario will be that the normally discouraged/"bad" practice is what takes additional effort to enable.


--- Comment #21 by dylan-bourque ---
> @dylan-borque, if $PWD is absolute then resolving to $PWD/bin/foo will be fine, right?

@rsc Yes, with the caveat that any existing directives of the form `//go:generate foo ....` will need to be explicitly updated to be `//go:generate $PWD/bin/foo ...` instead.

My objection was more about the premise that **any** binary that happens to be in or below `$PWD` should be treated as malicious. My example about go generate was just a specific scenario where we have intentionally set up an environment where we want precisely the behavior (finding a binary under `$PWD` by doing a `$PATH` lookup) that is now being treated as malicious..

If you do move forward with this, I would suggest that, at a minimum, this potentially breaking change should be called out prominently in the release notes.

--- Comment #22 by dolmen ---
`//go:generate $PWD/bin/foo ... ` will not work on Windows.

--- Comment #23 by dylan-bourque ---
Follow up question: Does this new error not occur when/if the resulting path is absolute but still within `$PWD`.  I ask because we had one of our `//go:generate` directives fail and updating `Makefile` to do `export PATH=$PWD/bin:$PATH` instead of `export PATH=./bin:$PATH` "fixed" it.  It's still finding the same binary in the same place, but the error doesn't occur if we pre-pend an absolute path rather than a relative one to `$PATH`.

--- Comment #24 by rsc ---
@dylan-borque, yes, the error only happens for relative PATH entries. Sorry if that wasn't clear. Absolute PATH entries are always respected, even if they describe the current directory. So yes, we expect that you'd update the Makefile to use $PWD/bin:$PATH instead of ./bin:$PATH (the latter stops being usable when you cd into a different directory).





--- Comment #25 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #26 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
