==== [Issue Title] ====
net/url: add Values.Has(key)

==== [Issue Body] ====
There is currently no inbuilt method within [Values](https://pkg.go.dev/net/url#Values) of detecting whether a query parameter without a value is set (e.g. `http://example.com/?queryname`).

I propose adding the following method to determine whether a specific key is set:

```
// Checks whether a given key is set.
func (v Values) IsSet(key string) bool {
	if _, ok := v[key]; ok {
		return true
	}
	return false
}
```

This would also work for query parameters with values.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by martisch ---
Can this be reduced to?
```
func (v Values) IsSet(key string) bool {
	_, ok := v[key]
	return ok
}
```

So instead of writing ```_, ok := v[key]``` with the proposal ```v.IsSet(key)``` would be able to be used instead?

--- Comment #2 by iann0036 ---
Yep, that is more concise, I agree.

--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
It seems like the usual Go word is Has for this (HasPrefix, HasSuffix, types.TypeAndValue.HasOk, etc).
Otherwise it seems fine - we typically don't bother and just use the map directly, but we've added all the other operations as methods on Values already.


--- Comment #4 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
There are 5 thumbs down on the original, but it does seem like this is the one operation that we _haven't_ put into the Values API, and we might as well.

Does anyone object to adding Values.Has? If so, why?


--- Comment #6 by cristaloleg ---
@rsc I suppose it's due to naming, `Has` (as you've mentioned above) is more natural for Go.

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #8 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
