==== [Issue Title] ====
html/template: make FuncMap an alias for text/template.FuncMap

==== [Issue Body] ====
As [discussed on Twitter recently](https://twitter.com/rogpeppe/status/1390346029371990023), when generics come around, the `html/template` and `text/template` APIs can reasonably be abstracted into a single generic interface, but the fact that `FuncMap` is defined as two separate types makes it a bit harder than it could be.

I propose that in `html/template`, `FuncMap` shall be defined as an alias as follows:

```
package template
import "text/template"

type FuncMap = template.FuncMap
```

As `html/template` already imports `text/template`, there's no problem with a change in the dependency graph, and I can't currently see any potential issues from combining the two types.


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by mvdan ---
Do you think any reasonable user programs could break because of this change? I can imagine some artificial cases, like requiring the two types to be different via e.g. reflection, but I don't imagine anyone would be doing that.

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
Seems reasonable to me. Adding to minutes. /cc @robpike 

--- Comment #3 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #4 by robpike ---
Seems sound.

--- Comment #5 by rogpeppe ---
> I can imagine some artificial cases, like requiring the two types to be different via e.g. reflection, but I don't imagine anyone would be doing that.

I thought about that, but I couldn't think of a realistic case where it might be a problem, Hyrum's Law notwithstanding.

--- Comment #6 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #7 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
