==== [Issue Title] ====
hash/maphash: Provide a `purego` implementation

==== [Issue Body] ====
### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

1.17rc1

### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?

GopherJS with Go 1.17

### What did you do?

https://github.com/golang/go/commit/64d323f45a5d6a36cdcb190bed56424a633af3ad improves the performance of the `hash/maphash` package, but in doing so makes the package even "less" safe than it was before. In 1.16 this was worked around in GopherJS (where pointer arithmetic is not possible) with https://github.com/gopherjs/gopherjs/commit/ccebfda74f29e7f37a55c1ce3d059160bd248601.  The recent changes will require a much larger delta, as now every caller to `rthash` will need to be updated, to use calling semantics more similar to the 1.16 version.

### What did you <strike>expect</strike> hope to see?

A `purego` implementation of `hash/maphash` would solve this problem. And perhaps it would be useful in other scenarios as well?


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by flimzy ---
cc @dmitshur 

--- Comment #2 by mvdan ---
My initial reaction was "I thought purego was for avoiding asm and cgo, not unsafe", but I'm wrong: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/23172#issuecomment-359569548

--- Comment #3 by randall77 ---
Are you proposing to replace `hash/maphash` with a purego implementation? What implementation would that be?
`unsafe` is used in that package for performance reasons. Any different implementation would probably need to be equally fast.


--- Comment #4 by flimzy ---
> Are you proposing to replace `hash/maphash` with a purego implementation?

No. I would keep the existing one for performance where useable, and add a purego version behind build tags.

> What implementation would that be?

TBD. But probably logically equivalent to what GopherJS is doing now (i.e. a slight variation from the Go 1.16 version).


--- Comment #5 by randall77 ---
So far the only purego tags in the main repo are crypto libraries. I think there's a higher level decision to be made as to how much we want to sprinkle the standard library with purego backstops. For instance, we'd probably need a purego builder to test that the code works.
But other than that (big) concern, it sounds reasonable to me.


--- Comment #6 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
In net and os/user we have netgo and osusergo tags instead of purego.
The only purego I see is in some crypto packages.
However, it looks like we accepted the idea of purego and did not get around to the documentation of it: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/23172.

Given that, it seems fine to have a purego hash/maphash.


--- Comment #8 by cristaloleg ---
Not sure but maybe this should be accepted first? https://github.com/golang/go/issues/23172

--- Comment #9 by randall77 ---
#23172 is accepted. It just needs to be done.


--- Comment #10 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #11 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
