==== [Issue Title] ====
bufio: add Writer.AvailableBuffer

==== [Issue Body] ====
There are many APIs in Go that append to a `[]byte` and return a `[]byte`.

Unfortunately, these APIs operate poorly with `bufio.Writer` since that type only accepts `[]byte` as an input (via the `Write` method) and never provides a `[]byte`. This requires logic trying to combine append-like functionality with `bufio.Writer` to be responsible for allocating a buffer, when `bufio.Writer` already has a buffer.

I propose the addition of a new method that provides access to the underlying `[]byte`:
```go
// AvailableBuffer returns an empty buffer with b.Available capacity.
// This buffer is intended to be appended to and
// passed to an immediately succeeding Write call.
func (b *Writer) AvailableBuffer() []byte {
    return b.buf[b.n:][:0]
}
```

Example usage:
```go
var bw *bufio.Writer = ...
b := bw.AvailableBuffer()
b = strconv.AppendUint(b, ...)
bw.Write(b)
```

In the common cases where `bw.Available()` is large enough, `strconv.AppendUint` appends to the buffer without allocating. When the buffer is passed to `Write`, [the underlying call to `copy` returns immediately](https://cs.opensource.google/go/go/+/refs/tags/go1.16.6:src/bufio/bufio.go;l=651;drc=7fbd8c75c6c57e713069a3a405e5cde26cfae090) without actually copying since the source and destination are identical. This saves us both an allocation and a copy.

In the rare case where it allocates, the subsequent `Write` call still works as expected, but needs to copy.

The detriment of this API is that it exposes the internal buffer of `bufio.Writer` when it was previously impossible to access it. However, the other types in the package (i.e., `Reader` and `Scanner`) already provide unsafe access to the underlying buffer via the `Reader.Peek`, `Reader.ReadSlice`, and `Scanner.Bytes` methods.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
This seems reasonable. Does anyone object to this?


--- Comment #3 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #4 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
