==== [Issue Title] ====
time: add Time.Compare

==== [Issue Body] ====
There are currently 3 methods to compare `time.Time` objects: `Before()`, `Equal()` and `After()`. These are analogous to `<`, `==` and `>`. But the equivalents of `<=` and `>=` are missing. I suggest adding `BeforeEqual()` and `AfterEqual()` to complete this.

I am fully aware that these new methods are not strictly needed: `t.BeforeEqual(u)` could be written as either `t.Before(u) || t.Equal(u)` or `!t.After(u)` or `t.Sub(u) <= 0`. However, those three are less readable than a simple and obvious `t.BeforeEqual(u)`. I have written code like
```
for day := begin; /* day <= end */ !day.After(end); day = day.Add(24 * time.Hour) {
```
where I felt that the comment was needed to clarify the intent.

Implementation of the proposed methods is trivial.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ALTree ---
At least to me, `!t.After( )` looks significantly more readable than `BeforeEqual`. "not after t" is a very natural way to express the concept of "at the moment t or before". And it's hard to justify increasing the API surface to add a function that is precisely the boolean negation of an existing one.

--- Comment #2 by jdemeyer ---
> At least to me, `!t.After( )` looks significantly more readable than `BeforeEqual`.

Really? If you wanted to write a `for` loop with `x` going from `a` to `b`, including both endpoints, would you write it like
```
for x := a; x <= b; x++ {
```
or
```
for x := a; !(x>b); x++ {
```

My guess would be that most people would write it the first way. And I don't really see why it should suddenly be different if `x` is a `time.Time` instead of a number. At least this was the rationale for my proposal.

--- Comment #3 by bcmills ---
If I wanted to write a `for` loop with `x` going from `a` to `b` in most languages, I would write it as a range.
In most languages, the range would be over the interval [`a`, `b+1`), because most languages use half-open intervals for ranges.
(To my dismay, Go does not yet support ranges for user-defined types.)

If I wanted to write a `for` loop over a sequence of days in Go, I would not use the 3-part loop form. (For me, the 3-part loop form is almost always less clear than some alternative.) Instead, I would write:
```go
	x := a
	for !x.After(b) {
		…
		x = x.AddDate(0, 0, 1)
	}
```

I think that form is clearer because it emphasizes the semantics: `x` is increased until it is after `b`, regardless of whether `b` happens to be an integer number of days away from `a`. (I think the use of `time.Date` to represent entire days — rather than nanoseconds — is awkward even at best; compare #19700.)

--- Comment #4 by ericlagergren ---
> My guess would be that most people would write it the first way. And I don't really see why it should suddenly be different if x is a time.Time instead of a number. At least this was the rationale for my proposal.

In English, anyway, dates are usually compared using "before" and "after" while numbers are usually compared using "greater" or "less." It's why `<` is the less-than operator, not the before-than operator.

--- Comment #5 by jdemeyer ---
> I think that form is clearer because it emphasizes the semantics: `x` is increased until it is after `b`

Right, but `x.BeforeEqual(b)` also emphasizes semantics the same way: the loop continues as long as `x` is before or equal to `b`. I just find the negation in the condition `!x.After(b)` slightly harder to understand: loops are often more naturally expressed as a "while" condition instead of an "until" condition.

> In English, anyway, dates are usually compared using "before" and "after" while numbers are usually compared using "greater" or "less." It's why < is the less-than operator, not the before-than operator.

Right, but that's just a matter of wording: "before" has the same meaning as "less". In languages with operator overloading, you would likely use `<` for both.

My point is just that it's often natural to write `X <= Y` for numbers (I checked the Go sources and there are many examples of `for` loops with a `<=` condition). And it should be equally natural to want to write "timestamp X is before or equal to timestamp Y".

--- Comment #6 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #7 by rogpeppe ---
I like this proposal. Getting ordering sense right is often tricky, and the lack of these methods means that I've often needed to write out an expression in terms of how I'm thinking about it, and then change the method and add the negation. It might just be me, but I find that extra negations make it harder to think about correctness, particularly when is trying to concentrate on the details of an algorithm.

However, another possibility might be to add a `Compare` method:

```
// Compare returns -1 if t1 is before t2, 0 if t1 equals t2 or 1 if t1 is after t2.
func (t1 Time) Compare(t2 Time) int
```

This is not only fairly easy to read (`x.BeforeEqual(y)` becomes `x.Compare(y) <= 0`
but could have additional utility with the advent of generics (see https://github.com/golang/go/issues/50340#issuecomment-1023524918 for an example), and save a comparison when using a time as one component of a larger comparison.



--- Comment #8 by ianlancetaylor ---
Considering that `time.Time` values have nanosecond precision, I'm curious how often the difference between `time.Before` and `time.BeforeEqual` matters in practice.

--- Comment #9 by rogpeppe ---
@ianlancetaylor It can matter surprisingly often in my experience - for example, a time might well be exactly equal before you've slept at all and the value is what you start with, or when you're not using `time.Now` at all but taking items from a heap or using a faked-out time source.


--- Comment #10 by jdemeyer ---
> However, another possibility might be to add a `Compare` method:

Sure, if that's the direction that Go is moving to. It's very explicit and it would also solve my use case.

> Considering that time.Time values have nanosecond precision

As @rogpeppe mentioned, not all `time.Time` values are "random". They might be timestamps entered in some user interface or they might be timestamps coming from a lower-precision source.

--- Comment #11 by rsc ---
I wasn't very enthusiastic about adding BeforeEqual and AfterEqual but adding Compare seems reasonable and fits in with the other places in the library that define a Compare. Retitling.

Does anyone object to adding Time.Compare?


--- Comment #12 by rogpeppe ---
Given that it's so simple to do, I just added https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/go/+/382734 to implement this.

--- Comment #13 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #14 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
