==== [Issue Title] ====
io: add an `Err` field to `LimitedReader`

==== [Issue Body] ====
New Proposal
=========

As per @ianlancetaylor's suggestion, this proposal is now to add an `Err` field to `io.LimitedReader`. If not `nil`, this field's value will be returned when trying to read past the limit imposed by the reader instead of the default `io.EOF`.

Original Proposal
===========

For various reasons, I had a need to use `MaxBytesReader()` in a situation where a `ResponseWriter` wasn't easily available, so I looked through the code to see if it was safe to pass `nil` and found that all it does is check a type assertion and then call an unexported method on it:

```go
type requestTooLarger interface {
	requestTooLarge()
}
if res, ok := l.w.(requestTooLarger); ok {
	res.requestTooLarge()
}
```

While it's true that because of this it's safe to pass it a `nil` `ResponseWriter`, it feels quite odd to rely on undocumentated behavior of this kind.

### Proposal

Several ways to clean this situation up come to mind:

1) Add an alternative in the `http` package that doesn't need a `ResponseWriter`. Because of how it works, it could actually just return the same implementation, but the function will be more obvious in its usage.
2) Document how the implementation uses the `ResponseWriter` and explicitly state that a `nil` `ResponseWriter` is valid.
3) Add a reimplementation of `MaxBytesReader()` in `io` that doesn't use a `ResponseWriter` at all and isn't tied to `http` behavior, but includes the other differences. This could actually be done, for the most part, by just adding an `Err error` field to `io.LimitedReader` that, if non-nil, is the error returned when the limit is reached instead of `io.EOF`.

In whichever case, the documentation for `MaxBytesReader()` should probably be filled in a bit. It is quite odd that something called `Reader` requires a type that is primarily an `io.Writer` implementation for non-obvious reasons and doesn't mention it anywhere in the documentation.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by jimmyfrasche ---
I have forked `io.LimitedReader` to return a custom error at least three times.

--- Comment #2 by ianlancetaylor ---
If the proposed function doesn't use `http.ResponseWriter`, then I can't see any reason that it should live in the net/http package.  That seems to reduce this to

```Go
type MyLimitedReader struct {
    r   io.LimitedReader
    err error
}

func (mlr *MyLimitedReader) Read(p []byte) (int, error) {
    n, err := mlr.Read(p)
    if err == io.EOF {
        err = mlr.err
    }
    return n, er
}
```

Is that correct?

If so, perhaps this proposal should be rewritten to add an `Err` field `io.LimitedReader`.

--- Comment #3 by earthboundkid ---
I like the new proposal. Returning io.EOF makes io.LimitedReader pretty unhelpful. But I think it would also be good to document that http.MaxBytesReader accepts nil ResponseWriter.

--- Comment #4 by bcmills ---
> I have forked `io.LimitedReader` to return a custom error at least three times.

FWIW, my [`moreio.LimitedWriter`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/bcmills/more/moreio#LimitedWriter) has an `Err` field too:


--- Comment #5 by earthboundkid ---
Can someone tag this proposal as under review?

--- Comment #6 by xeoncross ---
As an alternative to defining your own error, I just created a package and export the error so the caller can check against it.

```
// Throws an error if the reader is bigger than limit.
var ErrSizeExceeded = errors.New("stream size exceeded")

type MaxBytesReader struct {
	io.ReadCloser       // reader object
	N             int64 // max bytes remaining.
}

func NewMaxBytesReader(r io.ReadCloser, limit int64) *MaxBytesReader {
	return &MaxBytesReader{r, limit}
}

func (b *MaxBytesReader) Read(p []byte) (n int, err error) {
	if b.N <= 0 {
		return 0, ErrSizeExceeded
	}

	if int64(len(p)) > b.N {
		p = p[0:b.N]
	}

	n, err = b.ReadCloser.Read(p)
	b.N -= int64(n)
	return
}
```

--- Comment #7 by earthboundkid ---
~That would break current users of io.LimitReader/LimitedReader.~

I misunderstood the proposal.

--- Comment #8 by ianlancetaylor ---
@carlmjohnson It is already so tagged.  We'll get to it soon, I think.

--- Comment #9 by gopherbot ---
Change https://go.dev/cl/396215 mentions this issue: `io: add an Err field to LimitedReader`

--- Comment #10 by rsc ---
This seems reasonable. Thanks for the proposal.


--- Comment #11 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #12 by rsc ---
Does anyone object to adding this?


--- Comment #13 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #14 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
