==== [Issue Title] ====
testing/iotest: add ErrReader

==== [Issue Body] ====
### Abstract

Add a `iotest.ErrReader` `io.Reader` implementation that reads 0 bytes and fails.

This would be useful for quickly adding test cases for when `Read` doesn't work for some reason.

### Background

The `iotest` package already have a couple of other `io.Reader` implementations, but we don't have any that fails right away.

On nearly all codebases I worked in, I created this same `failReader`/`errReader` implementation. Judging by [this](https://github.com/search?l=Go&q=failreader&type=Code) and [this](https://github.com/search?l=Go&q=errreader&type=Code) github searches, I'm not alone.

### Proposal

Add it to the standard library, under the `iotest` package.

I actually have the PR opened already: https://github.com/golang/go/pull/34741

### Rationale

Make it easier to add test cases for read failures.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by rsc ---
I'd call it ErrReader, to match DataErrReader, but this seems fine to me.
That is:

    package iotest

    // ErrReader returns an io.Reader that returns 0, err from all Read calls.
    func ErrReader(err error) io.Reader



--- Comment #2 by caarlos0 ---
`ErrReader` sounds good to me as well. Updated the proposal.

EDIT: updated PR as well.

--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
Adding to proposal minutes. Seems fine to me, as I said before.


--- Comment #4 by rsc ---
Based on how trivial this is and the lack of any objections, this seems like a **likely accept**.


--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so accepted.


--- Comment #6 by networkimprov ---
I think the "help wanted" tag got mangled?

--- Comment #7 by ianlancetaylor ---
@networkimprov Thanks, fixed.

--- Comment #8 by caarlos0 ---
Do I need to do anything else here to get #34741 merged?

--- Comment #9 by psampaz ---
This is a very useful addition in the stdlib.

I was wondering why this has to fail immediately and return 0 bytes read? 

If the number of bytes read is set during the tests, ErrReader could potentially cover more cases
including the case of immediate failure using ErrReader(0)

Example:
```go
func ErrReader(n int) io.Reader {
	return &errReader{n}
}

type errReader struct{
       n int
}

func (r *errReader) Read(p []byte) (int, error) {
	return n, ErrIO
}
```

@caarlos0 does it make sense? 

--- Comment #10 by caarlos0 ---
> @caarlos0 does it make sense?

sounds good to me, not sure if it can be changed now, since it was approved as-is... cc/ @rsc 

--- Comment #11 by ianlancetaylor ---
@caarlos0 You don't need to do anything at the moment.  We are currently in a release freeze for 1.15.  After the 1.15 release goes out, we can review the CL.  Thanks for sending it.

Personally I think we should stick with the simple `ErrReader`.  There are an infinite number of possible permutations; we don't want to support all of them.

--- Comment #12 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/199501 mentions this issue: `testing/iotest: adds ErrReader`

--- Comment #13 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/248898 mentions this issue: `testing/iotest: correct ErrReader signature and remove exported error`

--- Comment #14 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/249037 mentions this issue: `net/http: use iotest.ErrReader on tests`

--- Comment #15 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/285673 mentions this issue: `doc/go1.16: mention new testing/iotest functions`
