==== [Issue Title] ====
cmd/go: add -C flag to change directory

==== [Issue Body] ====
I'm not sure if this rises to a proposal or not.

Many tools (e.g. make, git) have a universal `-C <dir>` flag which lets you do things in other directories without pushd/popd silliness.  Given how go uses CWD for important things like modules, it would be nice to have something like this in go.  For example `go -C path/to/dir list` gives me the package-path.  Otherwise it's things like `pushd path/to/dir >/dev/null; go list; popd >/dev/null`.

It's really just a convenience thing.  Has it already been discussed?  I couldn't find it.




==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by mvdan ---
I imagine this would be a flag to follow `go <cmd>`, such as `go build -C dir` or `go test -C dir ./...`. I don't think the root `go` command has ever taken flags directly, so it would be odd to break that rule - unless we deem this flag special enough. Note that we already have common flags between some commands, such as `-modfile` or `-x`. I also imagine some commands may not need this flag, such as `go version` or `go bug`, but perhaps I'm wrong.

As for the logic itself: would it effectively replace the use of the current directory everywhere? For example, if I do `go build -C /new/dir -o cmdbin foo.com/cmd@latest`, would the binary show up in `/new/dir/cmdbin` or in `${PWD}/cmdbin`? I would imagine the former for the sake of consistency; just like what a real pushd/popd pair would do. Note there are plenty of other flags that accept relative paths, such as `-modfile` or `-overlay`, so we need to think about them all together.

I think I'm neutral on this proposal. On one hand, it seems like a harmless addition, and there is indeed precedent in other popular tools. On the other hand, it's hard to judge how necessary the flag really is, and it does seem like a pretty far-reaching flag compared to the other common flags we have right now.

What particular use case are you thinking about? What is the particular problem with pushd/popd, the verbosity of it?

--- Comment #2 by thockin ---
I imagine it would be a very straightforward implementation.  If the flag
is set, chdir() and carry on as before.  No further semantic changes.

I ack the notion that the bare go command doesn't take flags, but I would
argue this sort of flag makes the most sense as a universal modifier.  If
not, I would then argue that most sub-commands should have it.  Happy to
audit those individually.

The main use case is to avoid the constant refrain of `pushd path/to/foo
>/dev/null; to do whatever; popd >/dev/null` in scripts (even worse if I
need the exit code from go) and to make it more like the other tools.

It's totally a convenience and convention thing, but also pretty trivial to
implement (I hope).

>
> Message ID: ***@***.***>
>


--- Comment #3 by zikaeroh ---
> The main use case is to avoid the constant refrain of `pushd path/to/foo >/dev/null; to do whatever; popd >/dev/null` in scripts (even worse if I need the exit code from go) and to make it more like the other tools.

You could use a subshell, which is a lot shorter than `pushd`/`popd` (or even the quietier `cd foo; cd -`) and do give you back the exit codes.

```sh
$ (cd foo; pwd; true); echo $?
foo
0
$ (cd foo; pwd; false); echo $?
foo
1
```

I most commonly do this with my Go checkout to run `make.bash` from my repo root: `(cd src; GOGC=off ./make.bash)`.

--- Comment #4 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
If `-C` is really "do a chdir before anything else", then that's easy. But what about

    go build -C bar -o x.exe 

or worse

    go build -o x.exe -C bar

Does that x.exe get written to bar/x.exe? What behavior will people expect?

It sounds like the suggestion here is that this command writes to bar/x.exe.
Will that be too confusing for people?

/cc @matloob @bcmills 

--- Comment #6 by thockin ---
I think bar/x.exe is consistent with other tools' semantics.

On Wed, Jan 19, 2022 at 10:18 AM Russ Cox ***@***.***> wrote:

> If -C is really "do a chdir before anything else", then that's easy. But
> what about
>
> go build -C bar -o x.exe
>
> or worse
>
> go build -o x.exe -C bar
>
> Does that x.exe get written to bar/x.exe? What behavior will people expect?
>
> It sounds like the suggestion here is that this command writes to
> bar/x.exe.
> Will that be too confusing for people?
>
> /cc @matloob <https://github.com/matloob> @bcmills
> <https://github.com/bcmills>
>
> —
> Reply to this email directly, view it on GitHub
> <https://github.com/golang/go/issues/50332#issuecomment-1016740382>, or
> unsubscribe
> <https://github.com/notifications/unsubscribe-auth/ABKWAVFJWLCREK54BOTWD6TUW357PANCNFSM5KVXFUMA>
> .
> Triage notifications on the go with GitHub Mobile for iOS
> <https://apps.apple.com/app/apple-store/id1477376905?ct=notification-email&mt=8&pt=524675>
> or Android
> <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.github.android&referrer=utm_campaign%3Dnotification-email%26utm_medium%3Demail%26utm_source%3Dgithub>.
>
> You are receiving this because you authored the thread.Message ID:
> ***@***.***>
>


--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
@matloob @bcmills, any thoughts on adding -C meaning exactly

    go cmd -C dir ...
    ==
    (cd dir && go cmd ...)

where the parens make the shell switch back when go exits.

?


--- Comment #8 by fsouza ---
Being nitpicky here, but I assume we'd want to make it equivalent to `(cd dir && go cmd ...)`? like if `dir` doesn't exist, `go` should bail with a non-0 code.

--- Comment #9 by mmwtsn ---
This would be a nice, small change that is consistent with other tools like `git` and would help simplify build scripts.

I worked on some build automation last year on a previous team that had most of their code in a monorepo. All of the build instructions and scripts were littered with `pushd/popd` or the equivalent `cd dir && go … && cd ..` pattern. This added a bit of visual noise and in some cases was error-prone when directory structures were refactored as the relative paths in `cd ..` needed updating. In those same scripts, git repositories outside of the main monorepo were interacted with using `git -C`.

I've seen some Makefiles in Go projects that followed patterns similar to this that would have also benefitted:

```Make
GOCMD=go
GOBUILD=$(GOCMD) build
BINARY_NAME=app

build: 
  cd dir; $(GOBUILD) -o $(BINARY_NAME) -v
```

The directory traversal was typically handled with something like that or `$(MAKE) -C dir` but having the Go tooling handle the directory change without needing to worry about using a subshell or invoking Make is a little easier to work with. For both shell scripts and Makefiles, I often see counter arguments raised that "you could just do *x!*" which are often technically correct but less friendly to developers who may not be as familiar with some rough edges in both areas. In that sense, a `go -C` flag would likely be easier to use for a wider range of backgrounds and experience levels, which I think is a good thing.

--- Comment #10 by rsc ---
Any objections to adding this?


--- Comment #11 by dmitshur ---
I tried to think of whether any existing cmd/go behaviors might intersect poorly with this, and did not spot a glaring serious conflict.

For example, go build takes -modfile that allows selecting an alternative go.mod file, which is okay to do at the same time as using another working directory.

Presumably, it'd also be possible to set -C via cmd/go's `GOFLAGS` environment variable, possibly configured in environment or via `go env -w`. Since the go command doesn't use the current working directory while looking up `go env GOENV`, it doesn't conflict.

Edit: Also, `go test` and `go doc` have boolean `-c` (lower case) flags. They do not conflict since this proposal is about `-C` (upper case).

--- Comment #12 by mmwtsn ---
I'd be interested in working on this if there are no objections to the proposal and no one else has picked it up yet.

--- Comment #13 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #14 by pohly ---
> You could use a subshell, which is a lot shorter than pushd/popd (or even the quietier cd foo; cd -) and do give you back the exit codes.

I also reached for that solution in a GitHub action and then found that it failed on Windows: it would accept the syntax, but then ran the following commands in the directory of the subshell.

So +1 from me for the proposal.

--- Comment #15 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
