==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: crypto/x509: add support to get SSL context from certificate store on windows

==== [Issue Body] ====
Please answer these questions before submitting your issue. Thanks!


### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?
1.9.2 windows/amd64

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?
yes

### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?
windows


### What did you expect to see?
A way to be able to get the ssl context from windows certificate store and use it for https requests from server required client authentication.

### What did you see instead?
windows syscalls which are not well documented on their usage in go. I would expect this to be done out of the box for users.

Info on windows certificate store 
[Windows documentation for .NET](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/framework/wcf/feature-details/working-with-certificates)


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by odeke-em ---
/cc @agl @alexbrainman 

--- Comment #2 by bradfitz ---
/cc @johnsonj 

--- Comment #3 by alexbrainman ---
@tsaridas your request seems too general. Could you tell us what exactly are you trying to do?

> Info on windows certificate store
> Windows documentation for .NET

I briefly looked at this article, but it talks about many different things. What is your problem that you are trying to solve?

Thank you

Alex

--- Comment #4 by agl ---
I _think_ this might be asking for a way to service client-certificate requests using CAPI&mdash;i.e. if you have a client cert setup in Windows, Go should be able to use it automatically.

This is plausible, but it's a bunch of work and I feel that it's very unlikely to happen until it's needed by someone capable of implementing it. Even then, it's probably something for an external package rather than the stdlib.

--- Comment #5 by tsaridas ---
@agl is right, that is what this request is about but also being able to use this certificate to perform a https call to a server that requires x509 client authentication.
I believe this is a basic functionality for Windows and maybe can be added to x/sys/windows ?

Or some documentation on how to do this in go would be really useful. 

--- Comment #6 by rsc ---
/cc @FiloSottile 

--- Comment #7 by FiloSottile ---
You can implement this functionality as a `func(*tls.CertificateRequestInfo) (*tls.Certificate, error)` function, which you can set as the `GetClientCertificate` callback in the `tls.Config`. You can then use it as the `TLSClientConfig` of a `http.Transport` in a `http.Client` to make HTTPS requests with it.

The `tls.Certificate` you return needs not to extract the private key if that's not possible, and can instead make `PrivateKey` implement `crypto.Signer` by using the Windows API.

I agree that this would probably be best implemented by an external package, and by someone with direct expertise/need. Chasing the Windows API for certificate validation has been painful in the past.

--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
This issue hasn't been updated in a couple years, but the discussion seemed headed toward a likely decline. Has anything happened in the past two years that would change the discussion?


--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
Based on the discussion above and the lack of activity, this seems like a **likely decline**.


--- Comment #10 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so declined.

