==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: exec: add (*Cmd).ExtraInPipe and ExtraOutPipe

==== [Issue Body] ====
Add convenience methods for using `Cmd.ExtraFiles` that returns `io.ReadCloser` and `io.WriteCloser` and also deal with file descriptor numbers in the child process. Similar to existing `StdinPipe` and `StdoutPipe` methods.

An implementation in the exec package could look something like this:
```go
// ExtraInPipe returns a pipe and fd number that will be connected to a
// readable fd in the child process.
//
// See StdinPipe for how to handle close and exit.
func (c *Cmd) ExtraInPipe() (io.WriteCloser, uintptr, error) {
	pr, pw, err := os.Pipe()
	if err != nil {
		return nil, 0, err
	}
	c.ExtraFiles = append(c.ExtraFiles, pr)
	c.closeAfterStart = append(c.closeAfterStart, pr)
	wc := &closeOnce{File: pw}
	c.closeAfterWait = append(c.closeAfterWait, wc)
	return wc, uintptr(len(c.ExtraFiles)) + 2, nil
}

// ExtraOutPipe returns a pipe and a fd number that will be connected to a
// writable fd in the child process.
//
// See StdoutPipe for how to handle close and exit.
func (c *Cmd) ExtraOutPipe() (io.ReadCloser, uintptr, error) {
	pr, pw, err := os.Pipe()
	if err != nil {
		return nil, 0, err
	}
	c.ExtraFiles = append(c.ExtraFiles, pw)
	c.closeAfterStart = append(c.closeAfterStart, pw)
	c.closeAfterWait = append(c.closeAfterWait, pr)
	return pr, uintptr(len(c.ExtraFiles)) + 2, nil
}
```

Both are very similar to how `StdinPipe` and `StdoutPipe` works but also returns the fd number that will be available in the forked child process.

Some design note and issues:

If you want to use `exec.Command()` and pass an extra pipe fd number as argument you will need to modify `Cmd.Args` field afterwards.

What happens if `ExtraInPipe` or `ExtraOutPipe` is used but `Cmd.Start()` is never called? enough with `os.Pipe()` newFile close finalizer for cleanup? user should close them? same issue for `StdinPipe` and `StdoutPipe` i guess?

Might be unintuitive that the public ExtraFiles field gets modified.

Uses `uintptr` for fd number. Same as `File.Fd()`.

Will not work on Windows. Same as for `Cmd.ExtraFiles`.

Related to #15460

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by bradfitz ---
I'm not sure there would be enough users/uses of this to warrant complicating the API.

--- Comment #2 by wader ---
@bradfitz Ok thanks. Close or wait for more comments or alternatives?

I did a "execextra" package with a Cmd type that embeds an exec.Cmd and wraps some of the methods. Seems to work quite well. Might add a link to it here if i feel happy with it.

--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
Based on the discussion above, this seems like a **likely decline**.


--- Comment #4 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so declined.

