==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: package tools

==== [Issue Body] ====
## BACKGROUND

My development environment just ran out of disk space and when I checked I determined that `$HOME/go` was the culprit. I started to look at the contents only to discover that there were so
many packages from places I've never hear of. Granted some were OK because they were legit. For example:

```
cloud.google.com
```

but others like a seriously sketchy

```
go.uber.org
opencensus.io
gocloud
```

### Feature request(s)

I do not doubt that is a complex ask but it is a serious flaw and potentially worse that docker hub

- need a white list of packages or git repos
- need an abort on nth level deps
- need tools to fork a project tree recursively
- need a way to determine if some set of libs could potentially communicate outside their sandbox

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by rsc ---
This is definitely a general problem we are aware of. See https://research.swtch.com/deps for example.
Custom checks can be built on top of the go command output of things like `go list -m all` or `go mod graph`. 
If you run a custom module proxy, like Athens, you can restrict the set of modules available.
Or you can download them and then use `go list -m all` to decide if you like the set.
(Note that downloading never runs code from the modules, unlike in other systems.)

As for "need a way to determine if some set of libs could potentially communicate outside their sandbox", there's really no sandbox at all, so this unfortunately isn't applicable.

In general this is not really a proposal - nothing concrete is being proposed. If you have a more specific proposal, please let us know, but this seems like a **likely decline**.


--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so declined.

