==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: net/http/httptest: Recorder.Result() should always set Response.Body to http.NoBody when response is empty

==== [Issue Body] ====
<!--
Please answer these questions before submitting your issue. Thanks!
For questions please use one of our forums: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/Questions
-->

### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
go version
go version go1.13.8 darwin/amd64

</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?
I looked at the code in master and it looks the same


### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?

<details><summary><code>go env</code> Output</summary><br><pre>
$ go env
go env
GO111MODULE=""
GOARCH="amd64"
GOBIN=""
GOCACHE="/Users/user/Library/Caches/go-build"
GOENV="/Users/user/Library/Application Support/go/env"
GOEXE=""
GOFLAGS=""
GOHOSTARCH="amd64"
GOHOSTOS="darwin"
GONOPROXY="<redact>"
GONOSUMDB="<redact>"
GOOS="darwin"
GOPATH="/Users/user/go"
GOPRIVATE="<redact>"
GOPROXY="https://proxy.golang.org,direct"
GOROOT="/usr/local/Cellar/go/1.13.8/libexec"
GOSUMDB="sum.golang.org"
GOTMPDIR=""
GOTOOLDIR="/usr/local/Cellar/go/1.13.8/libexec/pkg/tool/darwin_amd64"
GCCGO="gccgo"
AR="ar"
CC="clang"
CXX="clang++"
CGO_ENABLED="1"
GOMOD=""
CGO_CFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_CPPFLAGS=""
CGO_CXXFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_FFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_LDFLAGS="-g -O2"
PKG_CONFIG="pkg-config"
GOGCCFLAGS="-fPIC -m64 -pthread -fno-caret-diagnostics -Qunused-arguments -fmessage-length=0 -fdebug-prefix-map=/var/folders/z3/089w1c5x2ngbzyfj0wb2lp440000gp/T/go-build437685849=/tmp/go-build -gno-record-gcc-switches -fno-common"

</pre></details>

### What did you do?
https://play.golang.org/p/r3ypSy1vAIb

Attempting to use testify/assert to assert that the response is an empty body like

```golang
assert.Equal(t, http.NoBody, resp.Body)
```

### What did you expect to see?
Return `http.NoBody`  

### What did you see instead?
`ioutil.nopCloser(ioutil.nopCloser{Reader:(*bytes.Reader)(0xc000566ba0)})`

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by andybons ---
I’m not sure we make any explicit guarantees that an empty response’s body will be equal to `http.NoBody` or `nil` in this case. Can you point to any documentation that states this?

The [documentation](https://golang.org/pkg/net/http/#NoBody) seems to imply that this is used when constructing requests, not interpreting responses.

Is the desire that any response with an empty body be equal to `http.NoBody` in all cases?

--- Comment #2 by andybons ---
@bradfitz @neild 

--- Comment #3 by MaerF0x0 ---
Just to pile on an additional suggestion along the same lines. 

We could consider implementing json.Marshaler so that http.NoBody doesnt marshal as `{}`  (should be empty string, no?)

--- Comment #4 by andybons ---
@MaerF0x0 to be clear, my comments weren’t suggestions, but questions for you to gain a better understanding of your report.

--- Comment #5 by MaerF0x0 ---
My apologies, i thought those tags for brad/damien meant the q's were for them :). 

I do not see any documentation indicating http.NoBody to be returned. 
However, I was under the impression it is for responses due to some cursory reads of usages in the source such as: 

```golang
func (rw *ResponseRecorder) Result() *http.Response {
	//...  code ...

	if rw.Body != nil {
		res.Body = ioutil.NopCloser(bytes.NewReader(rw.Body.Bytes()))
	} else {
		res.Body = http.NoBody
	}
```
https://github.com/golang/go/blob/master/src/net/http/httptest/recorder.go#L181-L185

This guard seems to imply if the returned body == nil, actually make it `http.NoBody` . However the NewRecorder() func seems to always initialize `rw.Body` ...


--- Comment #6 by andybons ---
This sounds like a proposal, as the behavior is not explicitly defined nor documented. If we decided to set a response’s `Body` to `http.NoBody` in all instances where it’s empty, then there’s a possibility it could break programs that rely on current semantics (I haven’t dug deep into the APIs so I’m not certain if that’s true).

I’ll mark as a proposal for now and see what the committee thinks. Since Brad is on proposal review he’ll be able to chime in as well (if he doesn’t get a chance in this thread).

--- Comment #7 by bradfitz ---
NoBody was originally added out of necessity to make an ambiguous case not ambiguous, to know when a request was replayable (as an io.ReadCloser isn't in general comparable usefully). I'd rather not expand its meaning to guarantee when it's set in Response.Body.

I'd worry that if we did this, people would start testing `Response.Body == http.NoBody` and then we'd be Hyrum's-Law-locked into that forever (possible precluding optimizations in the future if there was a situation where we didn't know the Content-Length at a certain phase of the code).


--- Comment #8 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #9 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely decline](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-decline)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #10 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[declined](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

