==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: time: Duration should have .Ceil method

==== [Issue Body] ====
<!--
Please answer these questions before submitting your issue. Thanks!
For questions please use one of our forums: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/Questions
-->

### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
$ go version
go1.14.4
</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?
Yes


### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?

<details><summary><code>go env</code> Output</summary><br><pre>
$ go env
GO111MODULE=""
GOARCH="amd64"
GOBIN=""
GOCACHE="/home/jaap/.cache/go-build"
GOENV="/home/jaap/.config/go/env"
GOEXE=""
GOFLAGS=""
GOHOSTARCH="amd64"
GOHOSTOS="linux"
GOINSECURE=""
GONOPROXY=""
GONOSUMDB=""
GOOS="linux"
GOPATH="/home/jaap/go"
GOPRIVATE=""
GOPROXY="https://proxy.golang.org,direct"
GOROOT="/usr/lib/go"
GOSUMDB="sum.golang.org"
GOTMPDIR=""
GOTOOLDIR="/usr/lib/go/pkg/tool/linux_amd64"
GCCGO="gccgo"
AR="ar"
CC="gcc"
CXX="g++"
CGO_ENABLED="1"
GOMOD=""
CGO_CFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_CPPFLAGS=""
CGO_CXXFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_FFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_LDFLAGS="-g -O2"
PKG_CONFIG="pkg-config"
GOGCCFLAGS="-fPIC -m64 -pthread -fmessage-length=0 -fdebug-prefix-map=/tmp/go-build626039516=/tmp/go-build -gno-record-gcc-switches"
</pre></details>

Having a ceil method is usefull for cases where you have a minimum duration, but in reality it needs to be on a per X basis, so the duration might only be 0.5 seconds, but in-reality it can only finish once aa second so you want to round it up to 1 second.
The Time package provides a time round method for rounding to the nearest X and a truncate method for rounding down(towards 0) but not the other way around (away from 0) making it incomplete.



==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by mdempsky ---
> Having a ceil method is usefull for cases where you have a minimum duration, but in reality it needs to be on a per X basis, so the duration might only be 0.5 seconds, but in-reality it can only finish once aa second so you want to round it up to 1 second.

Can you elaborate on this use case? I'm having a hard time envisioning what exactly you mean.

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
@JAicewizard can you respond to @mdempsky's question? I too am having a little bit of trouble understanding why this is important to add to the API.


--- Comment #3 by kaey ---
I believe OP wants to replace this code with a method
```
dur := durationOfSomeTask
X := time.Second
if dur < X {
    dur = X
}
```

--- Comment #4 by JAicewizard ---
Imagine you have a task taking `X` duration and you have timeslots of length `Y` and task X can only finish at the end of a timeslot.
At the moment I have:
```
startTime = {start time} //time.Time
X := {duration} //time.Duration
realDuration := X.Truncate(Y)
endtime = start.Add(realDuration)
//realDuration will be Y less then we need, unless X == n*Y
if realDuration != X{
    endtime.Add(Y)
}
```
This would all be solved by being able to round up to the neared multiple of Y instead of just being able to round down/nearest.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
I'm sorry but I still don't understand. It still seems like very hypothetical. Can you give a more concrete reason why this would come up in a real Go program? 

Note that `endtime := start.Add((X+Y-1).Truncate(Y))` works today.



--- Comment #6 by JAicewizard ---
This is a real world example of where this is usefull. lesson.startTime/endTime are just timestamps and their week/year is irrelevant.
min/max are the start/end time these lessons should be active for (like term begin/end dates for example)

Here we calculate how much these lesson.startTime/endTime should be offset by in order to be the first occurance of this timerange withing this term start/end time range.
This is done by calculating how much it should be offset by to match the start time, and then round up to 1 week. Or in this case round down and then optionally add 1.
```
timeOff := min.Sub(lesson.startTime).Truncate(time.Hour * 24 * 7)
lesson.startTime = lesson.startTime.Add(timeOff)
lesson.endTime = lesson.endTime.Add(timeOff)

//remember, we truncate, so we will almost always fall short 1 week
if lesson.startTime.Before(min) {
	lesson.startTime = lesson.startTime.Add(time.Hour * 24 * 7)
	lesson.endTime = lesson.endTime.Add(time.Hour * 24 * 7)
}
```

This is an example of a real world program, or well if it ware not scraped it would be running in the real world.
Particular code is part of importing data from a scheduling program.

You are right that  `endtime := start.Add((X+Y-1).Truncate(Y))` might do the exact same, but it is unintuitive. .Ceil is much simpler to read, write and reason about when making changes.

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
OK, I think I understand what you are trying to write. Thanks for bearing with me. I wrote a running demo at https://play.golang.org/p/GUreZdb5pYI:

```
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"time"
)

func main() {
	start := time.Date(2020, 8, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, time.Local)
	end := time.Date(2020, 8, 31, 23, 59, 59, 0, time.Local)

	fmt.Println(start)
	fmt.Println(end)
	fmt.Println()

	example := time.Date(2001, 1, 1, 14, 30, 0, 0, time.Local)

	const D = 24 * 7 * time.Hour
	first := example.Add((start.Sub(example) + D - 1).Truncate(D))
	// want to write: first := example.Add(start.Sub(example).Ceil(D))

	fmt.Println(example)
	fmt.Println("=>")
	fmt.Println(first)
}
```

Note that while it works on the playground in UTC, it actually fails on my local system, in that the time of the event changes from 14:30 to 15:30 because of a daylight savings change. Not all weeks are 24*7*time.Hour long.

Note also that (d+D-1).Truncate(D) is not even correct when d < 0, so if we change example to be the year 2100, first will end up being August 14 instead of August 7. (d+D-1).Floor(d) would be correct, but we don't have Floor, only Truncate.

It would be weird to have Ceil and Truncate but not Floor, so really this proposal would be to add both Ceil and Floor.

And I'm also not convinced Ceil and Floor would be the right names since those are so tied to real -> integer conversions. It would be better to call them RoundUp and RoundDown. So Duration would have Truncate, Round, RoundUp, and RoundDown.

It's not too bad to consider adding those two extra methods. They are simple enough.

But since every new method incurs cost for users reading docs and learning the APIs, I'd still like to understand whether there's a widespread need, ideally in an example that doesn't depend on daylight savings time not happening.

I looked at [C#](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.timespan?view=netcore-3.1), [Java](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/Duration.html), and [Python](https://docs.python.org/2/library/datetime.html#timedelta-objects) to see if there was evidence of need in other languages, and as far as I can tell those all don't have any kind of rounding methods whatsoever.



--- Comment #8 by JAicewizard ---
I dont know if there is a widespread need, but considering there is a `Truncate` clearly there used to be a need of some kind of rounding. I found it odd to only see `Truncate` and not the other round methods since they are usually provided together.
Maybe it is also worth considering adding the opposite of `Truncate`, I dont know what it would be called but with those 2 combined users can easily construct `Floor` and `Ceil`. This might not be as elegant but if keeping the API tight is the goal it could be an option.

> Note that while it works on the playground in UTC, it actually fails on my local system, in that the time of the event changes from 14:30 to 15:30 because of a daylight savings change. Not all weeks are 24_7_time.Hour long.

Wouldnt daylight savings be a new timezone (in the go timezone sense)? ₣om what I can see a go timezone is always the same offset to GMT.

--- Comment #9 by ianlancetaylor ---
Go timezones do not have a fixed offset from GMT.  They do support daylight savings time.  As the docs say: "For many Locations the time offset varies depending on whether daylight savings time is in use at the time instant."

--- Comment #10 by rsc ---
If there were other use cases for RoundUp/RoundDown that come up the future, then it seems like it would be fine to revisit this. But _this_ use case doesn't seem like it justifies them, since the use does not result in a correct program.

Are there any other use cases? If not, we should probably decline this.


--- Comment #11 by JAicewizard ---
I dont know, maybe there are, maybe not.
I would definitly think of adding the opposite of `.Truncate` aka round away from 0, just to make it symmetrical.

If this is closed, I think we should invite people to reopen if they find a good use-case for this.

--- Comment #12 by rsc ---
Based on the discussion above, this seems like a **likely decline**.
It would be fine to file a new proposal for RoundUp/RoundDown, mentioning this one, if compelling use cases can be found.
(The use case here does not quite work.)


--- Comment #13 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so declined.

