==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: runtime: add SecureErase and MarkSecureEraseOnFinalize functionality

==== [Issue Body] ====
<!--
Please answer these questions before submitting your issue. Thanks!
For questions please use one of our forums: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/Questions
-->

### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
$ go version go1.15.6 linux/amd64
</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?
This is not an issue, but instead a feature request.
While I can write my own SecureErase and SecureEraseOnFinalize, it would be fantastic if the runtime had a method to do this. (I could not find a method call that does the SecureErase part, though I can do it with some of the runtime components like KeepAlive or the Finalize component myself.

What is being requested is to build this into the runtime as a feature.   Developers than can erase any sensitive data to reduce the window of opportunity for a memory-dump analysis or a HeatBleed style protocol attack.  In other words a way to minimize the time in memory that a sensitive piece of information is available.


### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?
Linux

<details><summary><code>go env</code> Output</summary><br><pre>
$ go env
GO111MODULE=""
GOARCH="amd64"
GOBIN=""
GOCACHE="/home/./.cache/go-build"
GOENV="/home/./.config/go/env"
GOEXE=""
GOFLAGS=""
GOHOSTARCH="amd64"
GOHOSTOS="linux"
GOINSECURE=""
GOMODCACHE="/home/./go/pkg/mod"
GONOPROXY="github..com"
GONOSUMDB="github..com"
GOOS="linux"
GOPATH="/home/./go"
GOPRIVATE="github.com"
GOPROXY="https://proxy.golang.org,direct"
GOROOT="/snap/go/6745"
GOSUMDB="sum.golang.org"
GOTMPDIR=""
GOTOOLDIR="/snap/go/6745/pkg/tool/linux_amd64"
GCCGO="gccgo"
AR="ar"
CC="gcc"
CXX="g++"
CGO_ENABLED="1"
GOMOD="/home/./go.mod"
CGO_CFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_CPPFLAGS=""
CGO_CXXFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_FFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_LDFLAGS="-g -O2"
PKG_CONFIG="pkg-config"
GOGCCFLAGS="-fPIC -m64 -pthread -fmessage-length=0 -fdebug-prefix-map=/tmp/go-build851289857=/tmp/go-build -gno-record-gcc-switches"

</pre></details>

### What did you do?
This is a feature ask.

<!--
If possible, provide a recipe for reproducing the error.
A complete runnable program is good.
A link on play.golang.org is best.
-->



### What did you expect to see?
I would like a runtime.SecureErase(interface{}) and a runtime.MarkSecureEraseAtFinalize(interface{}) method to ensure zero of memory at explicit call-time or zero of memory before GC.


### What did you see instead?
I had to write this myself.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ALTree ---
Lengthy discussion about this (including several people even doubting this can actually be implemented in Go) at #21865. I would be tempted to suggest we keep all the discussion in that thread.

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
Closing as duplicate of #21865.


--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so **[declined](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

**Edit**: Oops, I need to fix the bot's handling of duplicate issues. Sorry for the confusing message!

