==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: cmd/go: cross-package test imports

==== [Issue Body] ====
# Problem

Occasionally two related packages have some overlap in their test code. A common example would be a package defining a complex core data type and the manipulation of that data, and the consumer of that data type which may exist in many other packages.

The core data type may have extensive tests to verify the different ways it can be manipulated and ensure that it contains the correct values.

Consumers of that data type may want to make use of those test objects rather than go through the same process of recreating them.

Currently the recommendation is the put this common test code in a common non _test package, so that it can be used in multiple places. This works but breaks the namespacing. What if there are only certain parts of the core data type which should be public? Or if the tests require private access? What used to be a single `core_test.go` file is now split across multiple packages instead of using the same idioms we use when writing non-test code.

# Proposal

Put test code in an implicit `_test` package which can be imported to other `_test` packages.

Using the `core` and `consumer` examples, perhaps we have `core_test.go` which is part of the `core` package. It defines several useful functions that `consumer_test.go` would like to use. So we simply add `core_test` to get them.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by mvdan ---
> What if there are only certain parts of the core data type which should be public?

You could make an internal package, like `internal/testcommon` - but with a better name.

> Or if the tests require private access?

How would you share code that requires private access to multiple packages to begin with?

Personally, what I do is keep some helper test code in an internal package, then use it from each test package with whatever access to private code is necessary.

--- Comment #2 by winder ---
> > What if there are only certain parts of the core data type which should be public?
> 
> You could make an internal package, like `internal/testcommon` - but with a better name.

Thanks for the suggestion, my understanding is that this is currently the idiomatic way to deal with shared test logic. I think it can be improved :)

> > Or if the tests require private access?
> 
> How would you share code that requires private access to multiple packages to begin with?

This is really the heart of the issue for me. What if this `core` object requires many state transitions to reach the interesting test cases? It may be easier and less error-prone to set a private type directly rather than trying to carefully recreate the chain of events that lead to the state (carefully re-creating the state would be a different test).

I don't want the consumer to know about this detail, but a helper function that is part of the test package should be able to set it directly. Today that sort of thing isn't possible without making that helper function part of the public package interface.



--- Comment #3 by seankhliao ---
You could instead put everything in `internal/` packages and use a public package to export only the parts of your API that you want your users to have access to.

--- Comment #4 by seankhliao ---
also duplicate of #31135 #39565

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

This proposal is a duplicate of a previously discussed proposal, as noted above,
and there is no significant new information to justify reopening the discussion.
The issue has therefore been **[declined as a duplicate](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined-as-duplicate)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

