==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: io/fs: return ErrInvalid if the pattern argument of Glob is not a valid path

==== [Issue Body] ====
If `pattern` is a well-formed pattern but it does not satisfy `fs.ValidPath(pattern)`, `fs.Glob(fsys, pattern)` does not return matchings and does not return errors.

For example, if `fs.Glob(fsys, "a")` returns `[]string{"a"}` and `nil`, these other calls

```go
fs.Glob(fsys, "/a")
fs.Glob(fsys, "a/")
fs.Glob(fsys, "./a")
```

return `nil` and `nil`:

I propose, before the 1.16 release, that the `fs.Glob` function returns the `fs.ErrInvalid` error if `pattern` is a well-formed pattern but does not satisfy `fs.ValidPath` instead of returning a `nil` matched and a `nil` error.

Note that the `filepath.Glob` function, as `fs.Glob`, can return only the `path.ErrBadPattern` error but `filepath.Glob` cleans the pattern before matching the files, `fs.Glob` doesn't.

Note also that `//go:embed` has the same pattern syntax of `fs.Glob` (except ".") but

```go
//go:embed pattern
var files embed.FS
```
does not compile if `pattern` does not satisfy `fs.ValidPath`, instead of assigning to `files` an empty file system.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by bcmills ---
I think it would also be reasonable to instead return `ErrBadPattern` for these inputs: `ErrBadPattern` already indicates a pattern that cannot possibly match any files.

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
I am not at all sure we should make any change here.

> fs.Glob(fsys, "/a")

The directory "/" does not exist in an FS; that's why "/\*" doesn't have any matches.
It seems wrong to report that as path.ErrBadPattern, especially since path.Match accepts it.
It's also not invalid. It's a valid pattern, it just doesn't describe any files.
Instead we currently treat it like other non-existent paths, like "does-not-exist/\*".

As another analogy, if we are running on a file system without support for Unicode,
we don't make filepath.Glob("☺\*") return ErrBadPattern or ErrInvalid.
It just returns no match.

> fs.Glob(fsys, "a/")

filepath.Glob returns [no matches and no error](https://play.golang.org/p/m-eaOkylgMB) for this too.
It seems especially wrong to make fs.Glob return an error that filepath.Glob does not.

> fs.Glob(fsys, "./a")

I am more sympathetic to this example than /a, but not enough to make an exception.
Open("./a") fails too, of course, just like Open("/a").
These are valid patterns. They just don't describe openable files.

In the first two examples the behavior seems clearly correct (given the non-existence of / and the current behavior of filepath.Glob). That leaves only the third, but a special case would add more complexity about interpreting error results and deviate from the other two.



--- Comment #3 by gazerro ---
@rsc Thanks, I get your point and I'm fine to close this issue. Perhaps a note in the documentation could help to better understand this behavior, which after your exposition I believe correct.

--- Comment #4 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[declined](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

