==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: time: add UnixMilli and UnixMicro

==== [Issue Body] ====
This is a follow on from #44196.

It is common for go services to interact with external applications that use timestamps in milliseconds and microseconds, and currently conversion between these formats and Go's internal time is fiddly and error prone.

In #44196 we added Time.UnixMillis() and Time.UnixMicros() to allow go programs to convert to milliseconds and microseconds in an obvious, easy way. I propose we add the symmetrical methods to allow go programs to convert from these formats.

Correctly implementing the conversion from milliseconds to time is something people struggle with. Assuming that you only care about the range supported by `UnixNano`, and you have read and understood the documentation of the `Unix(sec, nsec)`, you know that you could do `Unix(0, msec*1e6)`; but it's common to see `time.Unix(msec/1e3, (msec%1e3)*1e6)` (in cases where the extended range really doesn't matter), or even `time.Unix(msec/1e3, 0)` (where simplicity was considered more important than precision). I also found an incorrect conversion (`time.Unix(ms/1000, (ms%1000)*1000)`) that made it past code-review.

Instead of pushing the burden for figuring out  to end-users of the language, I propose we provide a robust implementation of `time.UnixMilli` with a simple API.

For symmetry with `Time.UnixMicro` I propose we also add a `time.UnixMicro` that does the same.

```
// UnixMilli returns the local Time corresponding to the given Unix time,
// msec milliseconds since January 1, 1970 UTC.
func UnixMilli(msec int64) Time {
       if msec%1e3 < 0 {
               return unixTime(msec/1e3-1, int32((msec%1e3)*1e6)+1e9)
       }
       return unixTime(msec/1e3, int32((msec%1e3)*1e6))
}

// UnixMicro returns the local Time corresponding to the given Unix time,
// usec milliseconds since January 1, 1970 UTC.
func UnixMicro(usec int64) Time {
       if usec%1e6 < 0 {
               return unixTime(usec/1e6-1, int32((usec%1e6)*1e3)+1e9)
       }
       return unixTime(usec/1e6, int32((usec%1e6)*1e3))
}
```

(NOTE: The current package has `time.Unix` which does both conversion from a unix timestamp in seconds (by passing a 0 as the second argument), or for conversion from a unix timestamp in nanoseconds (by passing a 0 as the first argument). It would be more consistent, and subjectively simpler, if we added `time.UnixNano` and deprecated passing values outside of the range of 0-999999999 to the nsec parameter of `time.Unix()`, but I am not proposing we make that change as I don't know of a compelling reason to beyond "it would be nice")

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by dtmirizzi ---
Awesome! I was just thinking this while playing with the Atlassian API ([https://developer.atlassian.com/cloud/confluence/rest/api-group-audit/#api-api-audit-get](url)) 

Thanks for all the work 🎉 🎉 🎉 


--- Comment #2 by ConradIrwin ---
Closing this now #44196 was approvied with both!
