==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: testing: timeouts for each or a particular test

==== [Issue Body] ====
### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
$ go version
go version go1.15.6 linux/amd64
</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?

Yes

### What did you expect to see?

Similar to #10529.
**Proposal**: add a test-specific timeout

For CI pipelines and other use cases, it's useful to have a test-specific timeout instead of a timeout for the whole run.
For example, it would be nice to specify a timeout of 10s for each test. This way, more tests can be added without having to reconfigure the `-timeout`.

Additionally, it would also be nice to be able to pass a test even after timing out. This way, you can set different test-specific timeouts to adjust which tests run.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
Can you make some specific proposals for how this should work?  Thanks.

--- Comment #2 by kivilahtio ---
It would be best to have a timeout wrapper as a part of the test suite, so something like:

/// return true, or fail the test
t.Timeout(10*time.Millis, func() {
  // do the agitation of the particle
}, "Description of the test, eg 'agitate the space-schitzoid to reach boiling point in the certified duration'")

But writing a wrapper is not that difficult:
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/24929790/how-to-set-the-go-timeout-flag-on-go-test

--- Comment #3 by ianlancetaylor ---
I don't see how to implement `t.Timeout`.  What should happen when the timeout expires?


--- Comment #4 by gopherbot ---
Timed out in state WaitingForInfo. Closing.

(I am just a bot, though. Please speak up if this is a mistake or you have the requested information.)

--- Comment #5 by DmitriyMV ---
@honDhan just FYI [cmd/go: add per-test timeouts](https://golang.org/issue/48157) was accepted.
