==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: runtime: add way to clear and reuse a map's working storage

==== [Issue Body] ====
https://github.com/golang/go/blob/db8142fb8631df3ee56983cbc13db997c16f2f6f/src/runtime/map.go#L303 I see `runtime.makemap()` gives a way to reuse old hmap's buckets, but it is only used when mallocating small maps on stack at present. Why not open this shortcut to users for memory reusing? Actually I only need exporting `runtime.makemap()` and `runtime.clearmap()` to achieve this goal: 
```
func resetMap(mtyp *mapType, ptr unsafe.Pointer) {
	m := *(*unsafe.Pointer)(ptr)
	if m == nil {
		return
	}

	hm := (*hmap)(m)
	old := hm.B
	mapclear(mtyp, hm)

	hm = makemap(mtyp, 0, hm)
	hm.B = old
	*(*unsafe.Pointer)(ptr) = m
}
```
It works fine and benefits much on big maps. This is the benchmark results I got on operating a 1000-keys map (one op includes make(map[int]interface{}),  set 1000 keys and get 1000 keys):
```
func BenchmarkMap1000_ResetAndSet(b *testing.B) {
	var pool = sync.Pool{
		New: func() interface{} {
			m := make(map[int]interface{}, 0)
			return &m
		},
	}

	for n := 0; n < b.N; n++ {
		x := pool.Get()
		obj, _ := x.(*map[int]interface{})
		m := *obj
		for i := 0; i < 1000; i++ {
			m[i] = i
			if ni, ok := m[i]; !ok || ni != i {
				b.Fatalf("exp:%v, got:%v", i, ni)
			}
		}
		resetMap(mtype(unpackEface(m).typ), unsafe.Pointer(obj))
		pool.Put(obj)
	}
}

func BenchmarkMap1000_MallocAndSet(b *testing.B) {
	var obj map[int]interface{}

	for n := 0; n < b.N; n++ {
		obj = make(map[int]interface{})
		for i := 0; i < 1000; i++ {
			obj[i] = i
			if ni, ok := obj[i]; !ok || ni != i {
				b.Fatalf("exp:%v, got:%v", i, ni)
			}
		}
	}

	obj[1] = 1
}

//-------------RESULTS----------------
goos: darwin
goarch: amd64
pkg: code.byted.org/gopkg/memset
cpu: Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-9880H CPU @ 2.30GHz
BenchmarkMap1000_ResetAndSet-16     	   23750	     47376 ns/op	    5957 B/op	     744 allocs/op
BenchmarkMap1000_MallocAndSet-16    	    9390	    119347 ns/op	  128288 B/op	     785 allocs/op
```

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by randall77 ---
What's wrong with
```
for k := range m {
  delete(m, k)
}
```
?
That gives you an empty map with the bucket array of the starting `m`. At least, until #20135 is implemented.


--- Comment #2 by AsterDY ---
> What's wrong with
> 
> ```
> for k := range m {
>   delete(m, k)
> }
> ```
> 
> ?
> That gives you an empty map with the bucket array of the starting `m`. At least, until #20135 is implemented.

Actually I bench this scenario too, and it loss %2~%8 cpu performance since runtime.memclr() is more effecient than foreach iteration...

--- Comment #3 by martisch ---
> since runtime.memclr() is more effecient than foreach iteration...

there is no iteration in the generated code. Newer go compilers optimise the above to a single call to runtime.mapclear which uses memclr.
https://godbolt.org/z/vxKGzb639

Note that this doesnt work for key types that are not reflexive for ==.

A simple memclear allone doesnt suffice and other data in the map needs to be reset too to make it reusable. 
https://github.com/golang/go/blob/db8142fb8631df3ee56983cbc13db997c16f2f6f/src/runtime/map.go#L978

--- Comment #4 by AsterDY ---
> > since runtime.memclr() is more effecient than foreach iteration...
> 
> there is no iteration in the generated code. Newer go compilers optimise the above to a single call to runtime.mapclear which uses memclr.
> https://godbolt.org/z/vxKGzb639
> 
> Note that this doesnt work for key types that are not reflexive for ==.
> 
> A simple memclear allone doesnt suffice and other data in the map needs to be reset too to make it reusable.
> https://github.com/golang/go/blob/db8142fb8631df3ee56983cbc13db997c16f2f6f/src/runtime/map.go#L978

I got it. As you mentioned, if the key type is complex like interface{}, this compiling-time optimization doesn't work. So my way still gets advantage?

--- Comment #5 by randall77 ---
> So my way still gets advantage?

Sure. So the question is, is it worth complicating the API? And what would that API look like? How easy is it to use and/or how easy is it to avoid misusing it?

We tend to come down on the side of a cleaner API.


--- Comment #6 by OneOfOne ---
@randall77

Since we have `delete(m, k)`, can't we make `k` optional?
So basically `delete(m)` would internally call ~~`mapclear`~~ `resetMap(m)`.




--- Comment #7 by randall77 ---
Having `delete(m)` clear the whole map is possible. I don't think it is worth complicating the language spec for it, though. I think we'd need a stronger motivation than I've seen so far. Sure, every proposal is useful, but changes to the language need to pass a very high bar. Possible evidence could be that this problem is pervasive (e.g. find lots of instances where people would have used this feature, but had to resort to some lower-quality solution instead).

I'm not sure I understand the distinction between `mapclear` and `resetMap`. What different does the latter do?
(If it allows you to change the type of the keys or values, then it gets significantly more complicated.)


--- Comment #8 by AsterDY ---
> @randall77
> 
> Since we have `delete(m, k)`, can't we make `k` optional?
> So basically `delete(m)` would internally call ~`mapclear`~ `resetMap(m)`.

I agree with your proposal . `delete(m)` is more definitive and concise for users who even don't know the compiler's trick（including me 👀), therefore them can remind themselves to reuse the map as required

--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
We already recognize and optimize

```
for i := range x {
   x[i] = 0
}
```

as memset. Whatever fast implementation of map clearing we might come up with could be triggered just as easily by

```
for k := range m {
   delete(m, k)
}
```

right?

The question is really whether the optimization of that is "zero all the storage" or "shrink". 


--- Comment #10 by randall77 ---
> Whatever fast implementation of map clearing we might come up with could be triggered just as easily by
> 
> for k := range m {
>    delete(m, k)
> }
> right?

We already do exactly that, at least for reflexive keys (it's trickier for things like `NaN` keys, where after this loop we might still have `len(m)>0`).

> The question is really whether the optimization of that is "zero all the storage" or "shrink".

We currently don't shrink, just zero. I think shrink should be implemented in general (#20135) before we do anything like that for this optimization in particular. The tricky part here is that I don't see an easy way to tell the runtime "Keep the storage, I'm going to reuse it ~immediately", and "Release the storage, this map is going to be much smaller from here on out". Hopefully the automatic shrink mechanism, once we have it, will be good enough.


--- Comment #11 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #12 by OneOfOne ---
> > Whatever fast implementation of map clearing we might come up with could be triggered just as easily by
> > for k := range m {
> > delete(m, k)
> > }
> > right?
> 
> We already do exactly that, at least for reflexive keys (it's trickier for things like `NaN` keys, where after this loop we might still have `len(m)>0`).
> 
> > The question is really whether the optimization of that is "zero all the storage" or "shrink".
> 
> We currently don't shrink, just zero. I think shrink should be implemented in general (#20135) before we do anything like that for this optimization in particular. The tricky part here is that I don't see an easy way to tell the runtime "Keep the storage, I'm going to reuse it ~immediately", and "Release the storage, this map is going to be much smaller from here on out". Hopefully the automatic shrink mechanism, once we have it, will be good enough.

For my personal use case (where I do the `for k := range m { delete(m, k) }`, I don't really care about shrinking, this is used for maps in a pool that are usually pre-allocated with `make(map[X]Y, 4096)`.



--- Comment #13 by CAFxX ---
> The question is really whether the optimization of that is "zero all the storage" or "shrink".

If I want to empty+shrink we can simply create a new map, so maybe we don't need to focus on that possibility?

--- Comment #14 by rsc ---
> For my personal use case (where I do the for k := range m { delete(m, k) }, I don't really care about shrinking, this is used for maps in a pool that are usually pre-allocated with make(map[X]Y, 4096).

Maybe the signal is to not shrink below the initial capacity.

In any event, it sounds like we don't need "a way to clear and reuse a map's working storage" because the straightforward delete loop does exactly that and does it efficiently.



--- Comment #15 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely decline](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-decline)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #16 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[declined](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #17 by ianlancetaylor ---
This has been reopened in #56351, based on further thought about NaNs.
