==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: errors: export Is and/or As in an interface

==== [Issue Body] ====
Currently the definition for the signature of a type implementing the interface for `Is` and `As` lives in a one-liner inside `Is` and `As` respectively.

Is: https://golang.org/src/errors/wrap.go?s=1170:1201#L49

```go
if x, ok := err.(interface{ Is(error) bool }); ok && x.Is(target) {
	return true
}
```

As: https://golang.org/src/errors/wrap.go?s=1170:1201#L91

```go
if x, ok := err.(interface{ As(interface{}) bool }); ok && x.As(target) {
	return true
}
```

I propose these two be exported as proper interfaces instead for clarity and to ease use of tools like `goimpl` and akin.

```go

type SupportsIs interface{
    Is(error) bool
}

type SupportsAs interface{
    As(interface{})bool
}
```

This would also clarify the above snippets (this is just an opinion, not a critique of the code quality)

Is would read "err supports Is"

```go
if x, ok := err.(SupportsIs); ok && x.Is(target) {
	return true
}
```

As would read "err supports As"

```go
if x, ok := err.(SupportsAs); ok && x.As(target) {
	return true
}
```

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by smasher164 ---
Dup of https://github.com/golang/go/issues/39539. The justification provided was

> Any package could define those interfaces itself, of course. I'm not sure how compelling it is to define them in the standard library.

--- Comment #2 by natefinch ---
We can bikeshed the names, but I think it is pretty clear that code which relies on a specific definition of an interface should export that interface if it is not defined elsewhere.

--- Comment #3 by natefinch ---
For me, the most compelling argument for an interface defined in this package is one of documentation. It's much easier to find on an exported interface than buried in the docs of Is().

But also, the argument for "you can just write a test for it" falls flat for me. I could just write a test for lots of things the compiler could do for me. But why?

I guess I don't see why you _wouldn't_ want it here? It would be more clear and discoverable. It would give one canonical definition of the interface. It gives you a place to anchor the docs. I understand that keeping an API small is desirable, but this interface _already exists_ in the API of this package... It's just invisible. That's bad.

**Edit**: One more thing that I think is important - by defining the interface in the package, we give it a name. Without a name, it's really hard to have a conversation about this interface, or reference it. Right now, you can't tell someone "oh, you need to implement errors.Iser to do that...." you have to say "oh you have to add a method to your type called Is(error)bool to do that ...."

The json.Marshaler example is perfect. How do you do custom json marshalling? Implement json.Marshaler. I can google for json.Marshaler. I can't google (easily) for interface{Is(error)bool}.

--- Comment #4 by smasher164 ---
Closing this in favor of #39539. Please continue discussion there.

--- Comment #5 by ianlancetaylor ---
Has anything changed since #39539 was closed?

--- Comment #6 by neild ---
The two compelling arguments against adding exported interfaces containing `Is` and `As` are (as I see it):

1. We don't have good names for these interfaces. `Iser` is ugly, `Wrapper` or `Unwrapper` are confusing (and arguably not idiomatic), `SupportsIs` and `Unwrappable` are unwieldy (and arguably not idiomatic). Whatever we pick, someone will be unhappy.
2. We don't have a compelling use case. I don't believe I've seen an example of code which should type assert to them rather than using `errors.Is` or `errors.As`.

I think that a prerequisite for reconsidering whether we should add exported definitions of these interfaces is either unambiguously good names for the interfaces or a compelling use case.

--- Comment #7 by urandom2 ---
well, the proposed alternative, #40356, has been largely ignored, so that may be contributing to the ongoing suffering.

--- Comment #8 by neild ---
I would recommend testing that an error produces the correct results when used with `errors.Is` or `errors.As` over a type assertion. A type assertion can only verify that the error type implements the expected method; a test will verify that the method is implemented correctly.

--- Comment #9 by perrito666 ---
I can test my implementation of `errors.Is` and its behavior but that is not what I am trying to achieve here, the errors package does establish a contract where the presence of an `<type>.Is(error)bool`  method in anything that implements `error` will cause "special" behavior when invoking `errors.Is` so an interface should exist to support said contract.

Regarding the name: the fact that we cannot quickly think a name should not stop us, as this error handling method reaches further adoption (I, for instance, am using this more and more) we are talking about it and honestly it feels like trying to talk about Prince when he had a symbol for a name. "the thing that happens when you define an `Is` or `As` method in your error" makes it difficult to talk about it, document it, reference it and search for it. 

Let us leave this issue open for a few days and see if we can get more voices for and against it, I suspect the result will be different from last time as it has gained a bit more adoption.

--- Comment #10 by smasher164 ---
Wasn't there a spec change that ensured interface types are just method sets now? I would think that the argument in #39539 that naming it would weaken the abstraction doesn't apply anymore.

--- Comment #11 by rsc ---
Closing as duplicate of https://github.com/golang/go/issues/39539. (Still too soon.)
Will make sure #40356 gets added to the active set.


--- Comment #12 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[declined](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

