==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: cmd/go: canonical module aliasing

==== [Issue Body] ====
As per the [Proposal Process](https://github.com/golang/proposal#the-proposal-process), opening this brief issue for a discussion.

There are a few cases where module naming get messy. These are the ones I observed so far:

1. Mismatch between go-import tag and reality.

As an example, I'll use one of my projects: https://github.com/bpxe/bpxe

If you'll look into [go.mod](https://github.com/bpxe/bpxe/blob/master/go.mod#L1), you'll see it's defined as bpxe.org. GitHub serves HTML meta tags for it, but they are set for `github.com/bpxe/bpxe`.

But if I use `go get github.com/bpxe/bpxe`, I'll naturally get this:

```
	module declares its path as: bpxe.org
	        but was required as: github.com/bpxe/bpxe
```

Which is not fatal, of course, but is definitely annoying.

2. Renaming a module. Let's say there's [cockroachdb](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach) and if they decide to use a different name (say, `cockroachdb.com/cockroachdb`), if packages that use `github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach` will want to stay up to date, they'll have to be notified of the renaming as they won't be able to figure that out easily.

---

So, my rough proposal would be to augment module validation to something like this: if a module declares its path as A but was required as B, try to "go get" B and see if it resolves to the same VCS URL as A. If it does, it is in fact the same module.

Any thoughts?

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
CC @bcmills @jayconrod 

--- Comment #2 by jayconrod ---
Related #26904

cc @matloob 

--- Comment #3 by bcmills ---
This is more-or-less exactly what I plan to do for Go 1.18. I'll follow up with a more detailed design at some point in the next month or so.

--- Comment #4 by yrashk ---
@bcmills That sounds great! Please let me know if I can help in any way to get this to fruition. I'd love to have this in 1.18!

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
Because Bryan is working on a plan for this already,
we don't need to track this idea in this issue as well, so
I am going to close this issue as "coming soon".
