==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: cmd/cgo: pkg-config support default pc file

==== [Issue Body] ====
cgo user can custom default pc file to change CFLAGS and LDFLAGS.

for example:

```
#cgo pkg-config png
```

will read `${GOPATH}/pkg/cgo_${GOOS}_${GOARCH}/png.pc` at first (donot need install ‘pkg-config’ tool):

```
# See: man pkg-config
pkgroot=${GOPATH}/pkg/cgo_${GOOS}_${GOARCH}/png

Name: png
Description: png library
Version: 1.2.3

Requires:
Cflags: -I${pkgroot}/include
Libs: -L${pkgroot}/lib -lpng
```

if no default pc file, then use local pkg-config tool.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
It seems to me that we can already do this using `#cgo` comments.  What is the advantage to putting those flags into a `.pc` file?

--- Comment #2 by chai2010 ---
@ianlancetaylor 
as cgo user, i hope use different cflags and ldflags for dev and release mode (build target and zip).
if use `#cgo` comments, i need change the code. 
if use `.pc` file, i can set `PKG_CONFIG_PATH` to custom pc file for release mode.

--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
GOPATH/pkg is really meant for binaries and things that can be regenerated. 
It is a bit surprising to put a directory of configuration files into GOPATH/pkg/cgo_GOOS_GOARCH/


--- Comment #4 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely decline](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-decline)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #6 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[declined](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

