==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: strings: provide ContainsOnly function

==== [Issue Body] ====
strings package has ContainsAny. I have seen many package implement thier ContainsOnly. Although it takes just a few line of code, it would be nice to have it in strings package.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by mvdan ---
This proposal lacks detail. What is a ContainsOnly? Can you share links to those "many packages" that implement their own? How does it compare to ContainsAny?

--- Comment #2 by ghost ---
> Can you share links to those "many packages" that implement their own?

It looks like i lied. I only saw two packages implement it and both of which are for semantic versioning and they use it to check if `s` only contains alphanum and `-`. Although it may have other uses.

I am sorry.

> What is a ContainsOnly?
 How does it compare to ContainsAny?

It may look like this.

```go

// ContainsAny reports whether s only contains Unicode codepoints which are in chars

func ContainsOnly(s, chars string) bool {
	if len(s) == 0 || len(chars) == 0 {
		return false
	}
outer:
	for _, r := range s {
		for _, c := range chars {
			if r == c {
				continue outer
			}
		}
		return false
	}
	return true
}

// or

func ContainsOnly(s, chars string) bool {
	if len(s) == 0 || len(chars) == 0 {
		return false
	}
	for _, r := range s {
		if strings.ContainsRune(chars, r) == false {
			return false
		}
	}
	return true
}

```

--- Comment #3 by ianlancetaylor ---
I think this could be written as `strings.Trim(s, chars) == ""`.

Does this really come up often enough to deserve its own function?  Can you point to some existing code that would be simpler if this function were available?  Thanks.

--- Comment #4 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #5 by earthboundkid ---
This comes up, e.g., [to test that all characters in an email address are valid](https://github.com/carlmjohnson/emailx/blob/master/emailx.go#L45:L62), but I think that doing an O(n m) loop is wrong when you can use a lookup map instead.

--- Comment #6 by icholy ---
@carlmjohnson for small `char` strings, the O(n m) version might be faster.

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
The downside of using ContainsOnly for testing a character set is that the character set is very large. Passing "abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyzABCDEFGHJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ0123456789" and making the function figure out how to do that seems much worse (and less efficient) than just writing `'a' <= c && c <= 'z' || 'A' <= c && c <= 'Z' || '0' <= c && c <= '9'`. It's also much harder to read. Did you notice the missing I in the string?

It's even worse if Unicode is involved.

It doesn't seem like we have a compelling use case here.



--- Comment #8 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely decline](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-decline)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #9 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[declined](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

