==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: x/crypto: include shamir secret sharing algorithm

==== [Issue Body] ====
I propose the inclusion of the [Shamir's Secret Sharing algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shamir%27s_Secret_Sharing) into the `x/crypto` tree under a new package titled `shamir`. 

This is a common solution to the problem of splitting a secret securely for distribution to multiple parties. 

If this meets the criteria for inclusion, I would be happy to submit a patch. Thanks!

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by rsc ---
Is there any kind of standard message format or encoding for the secret parts? Any RFC or other document?

I understand the algorithm; I am trying to understand whether this would need to or be able to interoperate with any other system. If there are no systems to interoperate with, that raises a question of why, and whether we need to add it to Go.

/cc @FiloSottile 

--- Comment #2 by bradbl ---
That's a good question. I'm not aware of an RFC for this algorithm or any other authoritative standards document. It's primarily described by academic literature.  Perhaps this isn't a good fit for `x/crypto` in that case.

--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
Usually the reason to put something in the standard library (or x/crypto) is to interoperate with other code that would be using the same exact algorithms/protocols/etc. This doesn't seem to fit in that bucket. It would probably be best to start with a package outside the standard library. See https://golang.org/doc/faq#x_in_std for more.

--- Comment #4 by bradbl ---
Ok, thanks @rsc for the clarification.  Closing.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #6 by rsc ---

This proposal has been **[declined as retracted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined-as-retracted)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

