==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: cmd/go: use go.mod file paths in workspaces

==== [Issue Body] ====
This issue proposes an amendment to the Workspace proposal (#45713) to use go.mod file paths rather than directory paths in the directory directive, perhaps renaming the directive to `use`. It was originally suggested by @ianthehat in an [issue comment](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/45713#issuecomment-906914051):

> Now this proposal is accepted, I would like to suggest some minor changes.
> 
> I think that we should change it from listing directories (and implying the `go.mod` file in that directory) to explicitly listing the mod file.
> I think this would remove some of the confusion about exactly what it means to refer to a directory, and would also allow us to add directories with one of the meanings people have asked for in the future if we wanted to.
> The cost is negligible, basically existing lines would just need `/go.mod` appended to the end, and for the most part those lines are written by a tool anyway.
> This approach would also increase the flexibility of the system by allowing the `go.work` file to refer to module files not called `go.mod`. The go command already allows you to use this files in normal module mode, the two uses I know the most about are `go.tools.mod` and `gopls.mod`, but there are other uses as well. This would allow you for instance to have a `tools.work` file that referred to the `go.tools.mod` files instead of the `go.mod` files.
> If we did this, we would also need to change the name of the directive (from `directory`). I don't really mind what to, I was thinking something like `use` or `include`, but suggestions are welcome.
> The end result would be (using the same example as the proposal)
> 
> ```
> go 1.18
> 
> use (
>     ./baz/go.mod // foo.org/bar/baz
>     ./tools/go.mod // golang.org/x/tools
> )
> 
> replace golang.org/x/net => example.com/fork/net v1.4.5
> ```

cc @bcmills @jayconrod  

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by matloob ---
Personally I could go either way on this proposal, but I wanted to move this out into its own issue so we could have the discussion on a separate issue.

--- Comment #2 by heschi ---
If the file isn't named `go.mod`, how would the module root be determined?

--- Comment #3 by bcmills ---
@heschi, I would assume one of two behaviors:
1. Files not named `go.mod` are “packageless modules”, and don't inhabit any directory unless they are colocated with an actual `go.mod` file that is itself *not* in the workspace, or
2. Files not named `go.mod` are the roots of the modules in their respective directories.

I think (2) would get confusing, though. (Packages in local directories would shift across module boundaries depending on the `go.work` configuration.)

So that leaves (1). But is even that too complicated?

--- Comment #4 by heschi ---
I suppose the `use` directive could take two parameters, the module root and the mod file. But in the absence of concrete use cases it's hard for me to evaluate if that's a good idea.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #6 by matloob ---
We're going to retract this proposal. We haven't gotten consensus on it and it's too late for the discussion to yield anything before the freeze.

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---

This proposal has been **[declined as retracted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined-as-retracted)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

