==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: bytes: add Grow, Clip; maybe add bytes/strings Insert, Delete

==== [Issue Body] ====
Background:

Accepted proposal #45955 adds a new package called slices with the following API:

```
package slices

func Equal[T comparable](s1, s2 []T) bool
func EqualFunc[T1, T2 any](s1 []T1, s2 []T2, eq func(T1, T2) bool) bool
func Compare[T constraints.Ordered](s1, s2 []T) int
func CompareFunc[T any](s1, s2 []T, cmp func(T, T) int) int
func Index[T comparable](s []T, v T) int
func IndexFunc[T any](s []T, f func(T) bool) int
func Contains[T comparable](s []T, v T) bool
func Insert[S constraints.Slice[T], T any](s S, i int, v ...T) S
func Delete[S constraints.Slice[T], T any](s S, i, j int) S
func Clone[S constraints.Slice[T], T any](s S) S
func Compact[S constraints.Slice[T], T comparable](s S) S
func CompactFunc[S constraints.Slice[T], T any](s S, cmp func(T, T) bool) S
func Grow[S constraints.Slice[T], T any](s S, n int) S
func Clip[S constraints.Slice[T], T any](s S) S
```

Of the 14 functions, package bytes already contains 5 identical functions:

```
package bytes

func Equal(a, b []byte) bool
func Compare(a, b []byte) int
func Index(s, sep []byte) int
func Contains(b, subslice []byte) bool
func Clone(b []byte) []byte
```

Proposal:

The 4 Func variants don't really make sense for bytes, because they would involve mapping one byte to another, when it's more likely one would want to map one subslice to another. Similarly, Compact seems like a bad fit for bytes, since it would operate on sorted bytes, of which there are only 256.

That leaves 4 functions in slices but not in bytes. Of those 4, Grow and Clip seem extremely useful. I am already using them in my code, and variations of them can be found all over. I propose that they should be added to bytes for convenience and general parity with slices, since users already can find type specific versions of many slices functions in bytes and will reasonably expect to be able to use Grow and Clip as well.

The other two are Insert and Delete. These could also be useful for strings and we might want to add them to both bytes and strings packages. I am more ambivalent about adding these, since their Big O are O(len(s) + len(v)) and O(len(s)-(j-i)), but OTOH, if you know you needed them, why wouldn't you use them?

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by seankhliao ---
I don't see why this functionality should be duplicated instead of deprecating/forwarding the existing api to the new slices package

--- Comment #2 by earthboundkid ---
Why?

- The bytes package has functionality beyond what is in slices and will never plausibly be deprecated, so it's going to continue to be a thing people use.
- It's more clear to readers that bytes.Clip(b) is working with bytes than slices.Clip(b).
- Users who are already using bytes.Equal, etc. may be surprised when they go to use bytes.Grow and find it missing.
- Minuscule performance and import simplicity benefits.

--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
It seems like for now we can stick with package slices, which works perfectly fine on []byte.
The bytes package is primarily for UTF-8 interpretations of string data, which means mostly things that _don't_ make sense on generic slices. You did identify a few things that do, but we don't need to add more, at least not without evidence.
On string, Clip and Grow don't make sense, and Insert and Delete can be done with slicing and the + operator.


--- Comment #4 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #5 by earthboundkid ---
The inverse proposal would be to deprecate bytes.Equal and bytes.Compare, and remove bytes.Clone before it ships. I guess that would be fine too, but I don’t think it makes sense to add Clone in 1.18 but not Grow and Clip. 

--- Comment #6 by ianlancetaylor ---
The key difference with `Clone` is that we've historically kept the strings and bytes package as parallel as possible, and `strings.Clone` can't be replaced by `slices.Clone`, so since we need `strings.Clone` we should have `bytes.Clone`.  This argument doesn't apply to `Grow` and `Clip`, since `strings.Grow` and `strings.Clip` don't make sense.

(The order of `bytes.Equal` and `bytes.Compare` went the other way--from the bytes package to the strings package.  I agree that it would make sense to deprecate `Equal` and `Compare` in both the strings and bytes packages.  The only reason they even exist in the strings package is the parallelism between bytes and strings.)

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
Deprecate is pretty strong - it's not harming anything to keep the old functions around and working.
But we don't need to add the others.


--- Comment #8 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely decline](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-decline)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #9 by earthboundkid ---
The emoji reaction as of now on the initial post is 2 👍 1 👎  and 1 😕. I'm going to go ahead and close the issue for now because the underlying question is "Do users have an expectation of parity between slices and bytes/strings, as they have an expectation of parity between bytes and strings?" and we just don't know yet. Maybe after slices is released people will ask for bytes.Grow, or maybe people will be so happy with slices.Grow, it won't occur to them to go looking for bytes.Grow. We shall see.

--- Comment #10 by rsc ---

This proposal has been **[declined as retracted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined-as-retracted)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

