==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: cmd/vet: warn about `// go:...`

==== [Issue Body] ====
<!--
Please answer these questions before submitting your issue. Thanks!
-->

### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
$ go version
go version devel go1.18-35b0db7607 Fri Jan 21 21:58:14 2022 +0000 linux/amd64
</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?
Yes


### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?

Irrelevant

### What did you do?
From some internal code at Orijtech Inc that caused unexpected problems after runtime and deployment; it used an embed pragma statement to embed a file but unfortunately we had a space so `// go:embed file.txt` instead of `//go:embed file.txt`, the code compiled alright and was deployed but caused a bit of a scare until a colleague noticed the bug.
```go
package main

import _ "embed"

// go:embed hello.txt
var file string

func main() { println(file) }
```
<!--
If possible, provide a recipe for reproducing the error.
A complete runnable program is good.
A link on go.dev/play is best./home/emmanuel/Desktop/openSrc/bugs/golang/embed/main.go:5:1: pragmas should NOT have a space
Got:  "// go:embed hello.txt"
Want: "//go:embed hello.txt"
-->



### What did you expect to see?
I expected an error reported by a static analyzer or that it fails to compile this code. We have advanced tooling but unfortunately we are still letting such bugs go through. I really think that the compiler should do more to help out users flag such problems. I worked on an initiative such as in CL https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/go/+/34562/ which @randall77 alternated and nailed in https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/go/+/45010 to reject unknown pragmas in the standard library. I expected either a static analyzer report something such as
```shell
/home/emmanuel/Desktop/openSrc/bugs/golang/embed/main.go:5:1: pragmas should not have leading whitespace
Got:   "// go:embed hello.txt"
Want: "//go:embed hello.txt"
```
We should try as much to make our users very successful


### What did you see instead?

```shell
$ go run main.go 

```

To solve this problem I wrote a static analyzer internally that I'd be delighted to open source or even write a pass for, for x/go/analysis or to contribute a compiler patch.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by seankhliao ---
dup of #43698 ?

--- Comment #2 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/381914 mentions this issue: `x/tools/go/analysis/passes: add pragmyzer to flag invalid pragmas`

--- Comment #3 by odeke-em ---
I've mailed out a new static analyzer "pragmyzer" in CL https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/tools/+/381914 which fixes the problem and is simple.

Thank you for pointing that out @seankhliao, indeed in a limited case that that issue only requests for cmd/vet! However, I still think perhaps we should consider having the compiler actually fail to compile hence I shall keep this one open for proposal review.

--- Comment #4 by mvdan ---
My take is that a vet check is enough, as long as it runs as part of `go test`. Historically that combination has worked well, as developers run their tests regularly, and especially for error conditions that don't really fit a compiler's role.

--- Comment #5 by zpavlinovic ---
That being said, perhaps the most straightforward way is indeed to take the logic from "pragmyzer" and push it into buildtag analyzer?

--- Comment #6 by ianlancetaylor ---
I changed this to be a cmd/vet proposal.

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
There is already a buildtag vet check. That should be extended if needed.
It's a little tricky, because what if that's in a doc comment?
But we should probably do it.
The check should probably look for "// go:".
The buildtag vet check is still fine though; we do not need a separate analyzer.


--- Comment #8 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #9 by seankhliao ---
This was already accepted for `cmd/vet` in #43698

--- Comment #10 by mvdan ---
Also worth noting that I already suggested using a compiler/build error in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/43698#issuecomment-760394371, and it seems like the idea was already discarded in favor of vet. So I agree with @seankhliao that this seems like a dupe; it's far too easy to forget that a proposal has already been filed, even when you've participated in the previous one! :)

--- Comment #11 by rsc ---
Thanks for digging that up!


--- Comment #12 by rsc ---

This proposal is a duplicate of a previously discussed proposal, as noted above,
and there is no significant new information to justify reopening the discussion.
The issue has therefore been **[declined as a duplicate](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined-as-duplicate)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

