==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: path/filepath: add HasSuffix function

==== [Issue Body] ====

I want to have a standard way to compare file's ext

I know I can use `path.Ext("a.txt") == ".txt"` to check file's suffix. 
But it doesn't working on `a.tar.gz`, or if you want to compare with many suffix, you need go on a for-loop or use `sort.SearchStrings` 
Neither of them are elegant. So I want to require an API for it.  
That's my easy way:
```golang
func HasSuffix(f string, suffixs ...string)(ok bool){
	_, f = filepath.Split(f)
	i := 0
	for i < len(f) && path[i] != '.' {
		i++
	}
	if i == l {
		return false
	}
	f = f[i:]
	for _, s := range suffixs {
		if len(s) > 0 && strings.HasSuffix(f, s) {
			return true
		}
	}
	return false
}

```

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by mvdan ---
How is this different from `strings.HasSuffix`?

--- Comment #2 by vatine ---
Since Go effectively uses strings for file paths, I suspect a (file)path.HasSuffix would be pretty much identical to strings.HasSuffix.

But, looking at this, I suspect I would rather have a (file)path.FullExt that considers everything after the first "." in the file name to be the extension (so that FullExt("a.b.c.d") would be "b.c.d").

--- Comment #3 by zikaeroh ---
That can similarly be achieved my doing something like (in Go 1.18):

```go
_, longExt, _ := strings.Cut(filepath.Base(p), ".")
```

But, as far as I can tell, this form of getting an extension is probably inadvisable because filenames like `foo.bar.baz.tar.gz` are totally valid; I don't know what use case you have, but I'd think that checking for a suffix to verify that a file has an extension is safer than just pulling off as many dotted parts from the end as possible and hoping it's the intended extension.

--- Comment #4 by rsc ---
I do not understand how filepath.HasSuffix would be different in any way from strings.HasSuffix. Can you clarify?
If you want to check for _multiple_ suffixes, yes, that's a loop, but it can just be a loop over strings.HasSuffix:

```
func HasAnySuffix(name string, suffixes ...string) bool {
   for _, suffix := range suffixes {
        if strings.HasSuffix(name, suffix) {
            return true
        }
    }
    return false
}

_ = HasAnySuffix("foo.tar.gz", ".gz", ".tar.gz")
```


--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #6 by zyxkad ---
> I do not understand how filepath.HasSuffix would be different in any way from strings.HasSuffix. Can you clarify? If you want to check for _multiple_ suffixes, yes, that's a loop, but it can just be a loop over strings.HasSuffix:
> 
> ```
> func HasAnySuffix(name string, suffixes ...string) bool {
>    for _, suffix := range suffixes {
>         if strings.HasSuffix(name, suffix) {
>             return true
>         }
>     }
>     return false
> }
> 
> _ = HasAnySuffix("foo.tar.gz", ".gz", ".tar.gz")
> ```

Yes, I just want some function like that, I think it maybe go to `golang/strings` not `golang/path`

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
This is easy code to write and put in a third-party package. It is not clear that it needs to be in the standard library, and therefore it probably shouldn't be.


--- Comment #8 by rsc ---

This proposal has been **[declined as retracted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined-as-retracted)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

