==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: text/template: slice spread functionality in template func context

==== [Issue Body] ====
<!--
Our proposal process is documented here:
https://go.dev/s/proposal-process
-->
Problem: Using variadic functions within text/templates there presently not a clean way to drop a defined slice into that function. Attempts to do so result in:
```go
wrong type for value. Expected string, got []string
```
Direct usage of the spread operator valid in a go code context leads to a syntax error within a template context:
```go
unexpected <.> in operand
```
I can imagine two solutions to this problem. Either a "spread" builtin template function that can be dropped ahead of the struct to "spread" the a generic slice in a manner identical to the ellipsis notation but valid within a template context, or automatic type flexibility that allows variadic template funcs to process slices of the same type T as though they were valid variadic types. 

Present Workaround: 
Presently the only way I am aware of to work around this problem is to create a func wrapper.
```go
// variadic func in question
func variadicFunc(s ...string) output {
   ....
}

func wrapperFunc(s []string) output {
   return variadicFunc(s...)
}
```
If there are better workarounds, let me know. Otherwise, my humble thanks for considering this feature request. 

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
CC @robpike 

--- Comment #2 by robpike ---
I'm not quite sure what is being asked. Is the "spread" operator the "..." token? A complete example that demonstrates the problem and what a solution might be would help.

If the request is to add "..." to the template language, I don't think this is necessary or desirable. It's easy enough, as offered already, to do this with a custom function.

--- Comment #3 by ddemoss222 ---
My particular use case is in calling methods that use an "options" pattern that parses variadic function arguments to establish the method's options struct. In certain cases, when a pattern of similar usage emerges I have found a value in establishing reusable slices containing a grouping of options.

```go

type objectOptions struct {
	...
}

func (o Object) Procedure(opts ...string) string{
var options objectOptions
	// parse opts -> options
	...
}

func (o Object) CommonBehavior() []string {
	return []string{"option1", "option2", "option3"}
}

obj := Object{}
tmpl, _ := template.New("test").Parse(`
	Ad Hoc Procedure: {{.Procedure "option1" "option2"}}
	Repeated Procedure: {{.Procedure (spread .CommonBehavior)}}`)
_ = tmpl.Execute(os.Stdout, obj)
```
The addition of the above as a built in template func could serve to bridge a gap between the template context and go context. Thank you for considering this proposal. 

--- Comment #4 by robpike ---
Just have Procedure (or a variant) take a slice. The variadic touch here is unnecessary.

Here's the variant:

```
func (o Object) SliceProcedure(opts []string) string { return o.Procedure(opts...) }
```

That's so easy I don't see the need for a new feature in the template libraries. And since you already wrote essentially that in your original proposal, it's doubly clear that there is no semantic gap here.

This is not a workaround, it's idiomatic Go.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

This proposal has been **[declined as retracted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined-as-retracted)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

