==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: net/netip: add To6 to wrap an IPv4 address into an IPv6 one

==== [Issue Body] ====
Currently, there is no efficient way to wrap an IPv4 address into an IPv6 one. The most sensible way is to do the following:
```go
ip6 := AddrFrom16(ip4.As16())
```
~~But this is slow and not allocation-free.~~ But this seems to be unnecessarily involved. I wish there would be a new method `To6` that implements the same functionality but without allocation: (Note: I originally proposed `Map` here, but that name did not gain wide support.)
```go
ip6 := ip4.To6()
```
Here is a possible implementation of the proposed `To6` method:
```go
func (ip Addr) To6() Addr {
	if ip.z == z4 {
		ip.z = z6noz
	}
	return ip
}
```
As an invariant, for any valid IPv4 address ip, `ip.To6().Unmap()` is always equal to `ip`.

EDIT: Following @rsc's comment, I removed the unsubstantiated claim that `As16` is allocating.


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
It doesn't seem to me that `Map` is the best name for this method, despite the existence of the `Unmap` method.

CC @bradfitz @josharian 

--- Comment #2 by favonia ---
> It doesn't seem to me that `Map` is the best name for this method, despite the existence of the `Unmap` method.

Yeah, it's a bit unusual. I don't really have an opinion on names. :slightly_smiling_face:

--- Comment #3 by hopehook ---
How about:

1. Mapping
2. Mapped
3. MapTo


--- Comment #4 by favonia ---
> It doesn't seem to me that `Map` is the best name for this method

@ianlancetaylor How about `To6`? This seems to go well with `Is4`, `Is6`, and `Is4In6`, and will remain distinct from `As16` that is dealing with (16) bytes.

--- Comment #5 by favonia ---
I rewrote the proposal with a better method name `To6` and greater clarity.

--- Comment #6 by rsc ---
`AddrFrom16(ip4.As16())` shouldn't be allocating, nor particularly slow.
Do we need a separate method to make that a shorter name?



--- Comment #7 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #8 by favonia ---
> `AddrFrom16(ip4.As16())` shouldn't be allocating, nor particularly slow.

@rsc Thank you. I tried to play with the compiler and could not prove the allocation (not being familiar with the Go Assembler). I also agree that `AddrFrom16(ip4.As16())` is not particularly slow. However, I still think `To6` is much more intuitive than `AddrFrom16(ip4.As16())`, and it complements the existing `Unmap` method nicely. In any case, I appreciate that the review group is considering it.

--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
At the moment we have very little evidence that this comes up often. 
For a rare operation it's fine to have to write AddrFrom16(ip4.As16()). 
Do you have any evidence that this arises frequently?


--- Comment #10 by favonia ---
> Do you have any evidence that this arises frequently?

No, but I don't think we can reach a conclusion now because `netip` is still new and the old library does not really distinguish them. In any case, I understand the conservation towards the standard library.

--- Comment #11 by rsc ---
It sounds like we should likely decline this, but we can always revisit if we get new information about how often this comes up.


--- Comment #12 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely decline](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-decline)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #13 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[declined](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #14 by favonia ---
> It sounds like we should likely decline this, but we can always revisit if we get new information about how often this comes up.

For people who are interested, #54365 is the new incarnation of this proposal, and there is new information about efficiency and usage there (which are the two main reasons for the declination of this PR). I think we could consider revisiting it.
