==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: type parameters are comparable unless they exclude comparable types

==== [Issue Body] ====
## Introduction

The predeclared type constraint `comparable`, introduced with Go 1.18, is a (magic) interface describing the set of types for which `==` is expected to work without panic. The introduction of `comparable` led to considerable discussion (see [background](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/52474#issue-1211532558) in #52474 for details). It also led to confusion because the set of types described by `comparable` does not match the types that are considered [comparable](https://go.dev/ref/spec#Comparison_operators) per the Go spec.

Here's the current list of issues related to this discussion: 

- #50646
- #51257
- #51338
- #52474
- #52509
- #52531 

The goal of these proposals is to address the perceived shortcomings of `comparable` by changing its definition or by separating the notion of interfaces and type sets.

So far none of these proposals (if still open) have gained significant traction, and none of them directly address the core of the `comparable` problem: in Go ordinary interfaces are always [comparable](https://go.dev/ref/spec#Comparison_operators), i.e., they support `==` and `!=` _independently_ of whether the dynamic type of the interface is comparable. We cannot change this without breaking backward-compatibility.

Instead we propose to embrace this property of interfaces.

## Proposal

The underlying type of a type parameter is its type constraint interface; i.e., a type parameter _is_ an interface (albeit with a "fixed" dynamic type which is given when the type parameter is instantiated). Because type parameters are interfaces, we propose:

**Type parameters are comparable unless the type parameter's type set contains only non-comparable types.**

This is the entire proposal.

## Discussion

The reason for having `comparable` in the first place is to be able to _statically_ express that `==` is expected to work _and_ that it won't panic. If this proposal is accepted, `==` will be supported on type parameters unless the type set contains only non-comparable types. We will also lose the guarantee that `==` won't panic (if `==` is supported in the first place). We may still keep `comparable`, but more on that below.

This proposal hinges on the premise that losing the static "no-panic" guarantee is not as severe a loss as it might appear at first. We believe this could be true for the following reasons:

- We are well-accustomed to the fact that `==` on ordinary interface types might panic. In code, we tend to address the comparability requirement through documentation; we suggest that we continue to use documentation for this.

- If a type parameter is instantiated with a non-comparable type and `==` is expected to work, upon invocation the generic code is likely to panic right away. This contrasts favorably to the situation with ordinary interfaces where a panic may occur for some of the dynamic values but not all of them. In other words, making a comparability mistake in generic code would be detected quickly, probably in the first test run.

- Better yet, we don't have to rely entirely on dynamic type safety: it should be straight-forward to introduce a `vet` check that reports when a type parameter for which we expect `==` to work is instantiated with a type that is not comparable. Such a check would provide the equivalent of a static compile-time check, and virtually eliminate the risk of `==`-related panics.

With this proposal unfortunate restrictions caused by the use of `comparable` can be avoided. The `==` operator will simply be available to all type parameters unless their type sets contain only non-comparable types (it makes sense to exclude such type sets because we know with certainty that `==` will always panic for such type parameters). Examples:

```
interface                          comparable    may panic

any                                yes           yes
interface{ m() }                   yes           yes
interface{ ~int }                  yes           no
interface{ ~struct{ f any } }      yes           yes
interface{ ~[]byte }               no            n/a
interface{ ~string | ~[]byte }     yes           yes
```

This proposal also opens the door to more flexible (if perhaps esoteric) generic code that relies on `==` to work for some type instantiations but not for others, something that can be readily expressed through control flow but which is much harder (or impossible) to encode through types.

We still have the option to keep `comparable` as the "umbrella" set of types which are comparable without panic. Or we could decide to remove it because using it may preclude some uses of generic code (e.g., see https://github.com/golang/go/issues/51338#issuecomment-1057735177). Keeping it will also require a programmer to always make the decision whether or not to use it. To remove it we could make use of the provision in the [Go 1 compatibility guarantee](https://golang.org/doc/go1compat):

> If it becomes necessary to address an inconsistency or incompleteness in the specification, resolving the issue could affect the meaning or legality of existing programs. We reserve the right to address such issues, including updating the implementations.

Eliminating `comparable` would simplify the language and probably eliminate some confusion. The decision whether to keep or remove it is independent of this proposal.

## History and credits

We briefly toyed with a simpler form of this idea (type parameters should always be comparable) as a potential solution to the `comparable` problem shortly before the 1.18 release. At that time we dismissed making all type parameters comparable (and eliminating the predeclared type `comparable`) as too radical. The resulting loss of static type safety around `==` in generic code seemed unacceptable.

We are aware of at least one other person, Conrad Irwin, who independently suggested that all type parameters should be comparable in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/52509#issuecomment-1109359139.


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by hherman1 ---
Sorry I must be misunderstanding something, but if you were to instantiate a generic function with a concrete non comparable type (e.g a slice) wouldn’t you consider the type parameter to not be an interface? The point that type parameters are interfaces is confusing to me. 

Also couldn’t this cause weird action at a distance? A deeply nested generic function requires comparable type parameters and you don’t realize it?

I realize I’m not fully read up on this issue and there’s a lot of history here, but the proposed behavior feels weird and surprising as a dumb user, which is concerning me.


--- Comment #2 by griesemer ---
@hherman1 The view of a type parameter as an interface mostly affects type checking: for instance, in a generic function, the type of a type parameter is unknown when that function is type-checked (consider a generic exported library function were one knows nothing about clients - still we want to fully type-check that function). For type-checking we therefore treat the type parameter (more precisely, a variable of type parameter type) as an interface in the sense that we have to consider all possible types in its type set (we know a bit more than that, for instance we know that the type of such a variable, even if unknown, doesn't change for the duration of that generic function, which is why these are somewhat special interface types). It's also this type set we care about when that type parameter is used to instantiate yet another generic function.

We already have "weird action at a distance" with non-generic Go: a function operating on ordinary (non-type parameter) interfaces may hold a dynamic type that doesn't support comparison yet that function may try to compare the interface (all ordinary interfaces support `==`). A point this proposal is trying to make is that this might not be as bad as it might seem: we're used to it and we could have a vet check fairly easily. The other point this proposal is making is that the apparent inconsistencies with respect to type sets (and `comparable`) disappear if we use the proposed approach.


--- Comment #3 by atdiar ---
I think it could work. It still feels like we are admitting defeat on having full static checking. 

If we can use the provision, why not just make type parameters able to take a list of constraints?
Something like 
```go
type Set[T (any, comparable), V any]map[T]V
```
?
With `comparable` just filtering the set of types that implement `any`? 

--- Comment #4 by zigo101 ---
Does this proposal mean the following code will become valid?

```Go
func foo[T any](x T) {
	_ = x == x
}
```

> ... Eliminating comparable would simplify the language and probably eliminate some confusion ...

Is there still a `plan` to use `comparable` as value type?

--- Comment #5 by magical ---
Just to be clear, this program

```go
func eq[T any](a, b T) bool { return a == b }

func main() {
     var s []int
     eq[[]int](s, s)
}
```

would be defined to always panic at runtime, right? Not a compile error even though it's statically obvious that it can't succeed? If the compiler decides to stencil  `eq[[]int]` it would have to compile it down to, essentially, 

```go
func(a, b []int) bool { panic("[]int cannot be compared") }
```
since there is no way to implement the comparison.

---

How does this interact with comparisons to `nil` (or other constants)? I assume 

```go
func isnil[T any](a T) bool { return a == nil }
```

would still be invalid, since `nil` is not convertible to every type in `T`.

--- Comment #6 by griesemer ---
@atdiar I don't understand what you're asking about with the "list of constraints" `(any, comparable)`. It doesn't seem directly relevant to this proposal.

@go101 Yes, the `foo` function
```Go
func foo[T any](x T) {
	_ = x == x
}
```
would become valid since the type set of `any` includes all non-interface types, comparable and incomparable ones. Whether `comparable` would remain, and whether it should become a value type are questions that don't directly depend on this proposal: we could keep `comparable` as is for the static type safety that we don't have with this proposal, at the cost of less flexibility. If we keep it, we probably want to also allow it as a value type. But again these decisions are not directly tied to this proposal. On the flip side, if we accept this proposal we do have an opportunity to remove `comparable` which would simplify the language slightly.

@magical Correct, your example calling `eq[[]int](s, s)` would compile successfully and panic at run-time. Whether the `eq` function is fully stenciled and `==` replaced with a `panic` call or not is an implementation question. `isnil` would continue to be invalid code as is the case now. Note that in the case of `eq`, `go vet` could easily detect that `==` is used on operands of type `T` and report an error if `T` is instantiated with a non-comparable type like `[]int`.


--- Comment #7 by atdiar ---
@griesemer
If an interface used as a constraint defines the set of permissible types, what keeps us from selecting the comparable subset? (i.e. The set of types that are comparable according to the spec) 

It's relevant to that proposal in the sense that it would avoid the use of a static tool.

If it's really too off-topic I will disengage but I am curious. 

--- Comment #8 by zigo101 ---
I wonder how feasible to remove `comparable`. Will it be declared as an alias of `any` to keep compatibility?

--- Comment #9 by Merovius ---
To me, this throws the baby out with the bathwater. It seems to have ~all of the downsides of #52509 except that it converts some compile time errors into run time panics. I assume the argument is that it is confusing to have compiler errors for *some* bugs of this class of, but not all - but IMO that is completely fine and not a good argument to not have compiler errors for *any* bugs of this class.

I still believe both #51338 and #52509 are acceptable solutions. And the more we talk about it, the more I become entrenched into my view that they are the best ones (either of them). They have downside, but it's fine to accept downsides sometimes.

> We still have the option to keep comparable as the "umbrella" set of types which are comparable without panic. Or we could decide to remove it because using it may preclude some uses of generic code

IMO, if we do this, we should absolutely remove `comparable`. It wouldn't allow the author of a generic function to do anything new, it would only prevent the user of a generic function from using it. That just feels like the current situation, but worse.

In other words, one of the flagship use cases for `comparable` is `Set[T comparable]`. The discussion is caused by `Set[reflect.Type]` currently being impossible. With this proposal, the recommendation would thus be to write `Set[T any]` instead. At that point, this flagship use case for `comparable` goes away. Similarly for at least *most* other obvious use-cases. So ISTM that with this proposal, the general guidance on `comparable` would be "don't use it, it unduly restricts the user of your function/type", in which case it should just go away.

--- Comment #10 by changkun ---
> Type parameters are comparable unless the type parameter's type set contains only non-comparable types.

How does this definition differ from "Types that supports == or !="? Specifically, what's the differentiation between this proposal and #52509?


--- Comment #11 by ConradIrwin ---
@griesemer thanks for taking the time to write this up more concretely, I still think this would be a very good simplification for the language as a whole (and agree with @Merovius that assuming this proposal is accepted, deprecating `comparable` would be the obvious next step).

To the point around bathwater... I do agree that it reduces some compiler completeness; but I don't think the programmer error of "passing something not comparable where comparability is needed" is a very common one in my experience (compared to say, just a logic bug). As pointed out in the proposal, it would still be found by cursory testing. So I think the trade-off of "a very confusing keyword" vs "a slightly longer turn around time to identify specific classes of bug in your code" is well worth it overall.

@changkun That proposal still leaves `comparable` as a required keyword to use the `==` operator; this proposal would eliminate the need for that to be specified explicitly; which would avoid the problems around "virality" or "coloring" discussed in the other issues (and reduce the number of things for new go programmers to learn about).



--- Comment #12 by changkun ---
> this proposal would eliminate the need for that to be specified explicitly

Thanks for clarifying this. The goal here is radical as we already have `comparable` in the language. Despite the interpretation of the Go 1 compatibility promise may differ, it remains a significant historical remark if this actually happens.

Take a step back, and I think the suggested wording in [CL 401874](https://go.dev/cl/401874) that separates the notion of interface and type set may balance this better. As noted in the CL commit message:

Defining "a type parameter is an interface", "may reflect a simplification, but it is also cumbersome for the predeclared identifier `comparable` because

1) comparable cannot be easily defined using an interface and implemented
   using compiler magic;
2) comparable is very confusing to use"

This observation points to the key challenge of the current generics design: **Type constraints are limited by the expressiveness of an interface**, there are (more than one possible) type sets cannot be defined using an interface. `comparable` is already a good example to show this limitation, and the known limitation noted in the [1.18 release note](https://go.dev/doc/go1.18) also confirms more examples, such as `interface { string | fmt.Stringer }`. A theoretical proof may be more supportive in favor of this observation.

This should arise the reflect: As previous discussions revealed the need of multiple differently defined comparable definitions (in real world), it might worth to do the separation between interfaces and type sets.

--- Comment #13 by Merovius ---
> The `==` operator will simply be available to all type parameters unless their type sets contain only non-comparable types (it makes sense to exclude such type sets because we know with certainty that `==` will always panic for such type parameters).

I don't think it poses a problem, but if we ever make all interfaces into full types, this restriction would fully go away, as you could always instantiate a generic function using its constraint. i.e. the set of types a constraint would allow will always include a comparable type - the constraint itself.

It's not a problem, because it will be a relaxation of a restriction (i.e. it will only allow more programs to compile, not prevent previously compiling programs to stop compiling). It might hint at a bit of strangeness about this rule though.

@ConradIrwin 

> I do agree that it reduces some compiler completeness; but I don't think the programmer error of "passing something not comparable where comparability is needed" is a very common one in my experience (compared to say, just a logic bug). As pointed out in the proposal, it would still be found by cursory testing. So I think the trade-off of "a very confusing keyword" vs "a slightly longer turn around time to identify specific classes of bug in your code" is well worth it overall.

I don't think #52509 leaves us with "a very confusing keyword" (nit: predeclared identifier) at all. So I disagree that this is a tradeoff we are making. In particular, anything that *would* still be confusing about `comparable` would only happen in exactly the same situation where we get runtime panics with this proposal. So if you discount that, because it's not a very common mistake to make, it seems only fair to also discount the confusion this mistake would cause about `comparable`.

IMO #52509 even makes the better tradeoff - because *when* that happens, there is at least a very clear indication in the API, that the values are supposed to be comparable. That's not something we even have here. That is, with #52509, if you get a panic by instantiating a generic function using an interface type and then get a panic in the comparison, you can at least look at the signature and say "oh, it says the value needs to be comparable, makes sense", whereas here, you end at "well, the signature says `any`, so…".

--- Comment #14 by atdiar ---
Just leaving that as a note but I agree with @changkun https://github.com/golang/go/issues/52614#issuecomment-1112926210

The problem with `comparable` was that we decided to have only one way to build the set of permissible types for a type parameter: an interface.

That's the reason behind #52531: to be able to introduce a refinement so that we can select the comparable (in its spec sense) subset of a set of types. Although it might be more complex in implementation, I don't know why it was deemed as not addressing the issue.
(the only difference was the name, that was different for backward-compatibility reasons) 

Also a little nit, it seems to me that the set of permissible types is not always a type set. For instance, basic interfaces are included in the set of permissible types, not in their own type set. 

--- Comment #15 by Merovius ---
> That's the reason behind #52531: to be able to introduce a refinement so that we can select the comparable (in its spec sense) subset of a set of types. Although it might be more complex in implementation, I don't know why it was deemed as not addressing the issue.

I wouldn't say that it doesn't address the issue. I *would* say that it's either a) the same as #49587 (in its original phrasing) or b) the same as #52509 (with your latest comment, after removing the second comparison constraint). It is phrased more complicatedly, but in terms of what code it allows to write and how that code is written, it does the same.

Both of those proposals *do* address the issue. Both have other downsides. But that doesn't mean we can't accept them anyways. I wouldn't say there has been a final decision made on any of these proposals.

--- Comment #16 by atdiar ---
Well if you leave the part about `comparable` not being an interface anymore, they might look similar I guess (it would be equivalent to having both).

But yes, on the topic of the current proposal, it feels like we are dropping the ball perhaps too early. Although it could be seen as an engineering tradeoff, I'm not too sure about it. 😕

--- Comment #17 by Merovius ---
> Well if you leave the part about `comparable` not being an interface anymore

I think the only practical difference this makes, is that it doesn't allow mixing `comparable` with other constraints. Which is a problem with the design that would [need to be addressed](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/52531#issuecomment-1108103775). At that point, any practical difference vanishes.

--- Comment #18 by atdiar ---
> > Well if you leave the part about `comparable` not being an interface anymore
> 
> I think the only practical difference this makes, is that it doesn't allow mixing `comparable` with other constraints. Which is a problem with the design that would [need to be addressed](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/52531#issuecomment-1108103775). At that point, any practical difference vanishes.

I don't want to hijack this issue much more but there is still a practical difference. `comparable` would not define a type set any longer. Only a set of permissible types which would _also_ include all interface types and well-defined composites.
That's an important distinction.
The issue of mixing `comparable` with interfaces is acknowledged. 
But it's really too off-topic now. Let's talk about it on #52531. 

--- Comment #19 by aarzilli ---
What happens to derived map types? 
```
func F[K any]() map[K]bool { return nil }
```

does this become valid? Is instantiating it with a non-comparable type a typechecker error or a runtime panic? Or can you actually get a `map[[]int]bool` that doesn't work?


--- Comment #20 by earthboundkid ---
> ```
> func F[K any]() map[K]bool { return nil }
> ```

IIUC, that would panic when run. 

Here is another tough case. This does not compile:

```go
func f(a []byte) {
	var b []byte = nil
	_ = a == b
}
```

But presumably this will compile and panic at runtime?

```go
func f[T *any|[]byte](a T) {
	var b T = nil
	_ = a == b
}

f[[]byte](nil)
```

It's confusing because you can compare []byte to nil, but only against a constant nil, not against a variable that happens to have nil in it.

--- Comment #21 by zephyrtronium ---
@Merovius 
> > The `==` operator will simply be available to all type parameters unless their type sets contain only non-comparable types (it makes sense to exclude such type sets because we know with certainty that `==` will always panic for such type parameters).
> 
> I don't think it poses a problem, but if we ever make all interfaces into full types, this restriction would fully go away, as you could always instantiate a generic function using its constraint. i.e. the set of types a constraint would allow will always include a comparable type - the constraint itself.

An alternative here is to adjust the meaning of "comparable" to specifically exclude interfaces that have no comparable types. At least to me, that rule seems at first like it is a bit too subtle, but we already have precedent with struct and array types that the comparability of a type can depend on the contents of the type definition. It is a straightforward rule which also seems reasonable to include in the spec change for this proposal.

--- Comment #22 by apparentlymart ---
I said this in more words in one of the previous proposals, but it seems more relevant here and so I'll state it again more concisely this time:

My general assumption is that whenever I use interface types (by which I mean: the pre-type-parameters mechanism for opting in to dynamic dispatch based on an interface) I am opting in to the possibility of panics at runtime in return for the flexibility of choosing a concrete type at runtime.

Therefore I expect to be able to choose to place an interface type in a type parameter and have the compiler defer to runtime any checks that depend on the final concrete type. This is under control of the caller of the generic function/type and so their own risk to take; the author of the callee only needs to specify that they require a comparable type, without regard to whether a caller will satisfy that constraint statically (by using a concrete type that the compiler can prove is comparable) or dynamically (by using an interface type where comparability is known only at runtime, and might therefore panic).

Constraining use of interface types because we don't know what concrete type they will contain at runtime rather seems to defeat the benefit of having them in the language. Callers are still free to use concrete types if they want the additional static guarantee of no panics at runtime.

This proposal seems to be a compromise within that mental model and so it seems favorable to me.


--- Comment #23 by rogpeppe ---
@griesemer 
> If a type parameter is instantiated with a non-comparable type and == is expected to work, upon invocation the generic code is likely to panic right away

That's interesting. Why is that?

Specifically, would the following code panic? (one could replace `false` with any unlikely or non-test-covered condition)

```
func F[T any](a, b T) {
    if false {
       _ = a == b
    }
}
```


--- Comment #24 by griesemer ---
@rogpeppe I've tried to phrase this carefully, but perhaps the choice of "likely" was not careful enough. To elaborate: I suspect that _in practice_, generic code that crucially relies on `==` to work for its data is likely going to execute a comparison "fairly often". And if it doesn't, perhaps its test coverage is not good enough.

Of course one can easily construct (unrealistic?) cases where this is not the case.

Your function `F` would not panic, of course.


--- Comment #25 by Merovius ---
> Therefore I expect to be able to choose to place an interface type in a type parameter and have the compiler defer to runtime any checks that depend on the final concrete type.

I don't think this is really true, though. For example, the check that the value has a specific method is done at compile time. Really, the *only* such check (I can think of) is comparability. Hence the issues we are having with that specifically.

I honestly don't think that "interfaces are for dynamic dispatch" has even the slightest contest with making them type-safe at all. Most languages have some form of dynamic dispatch, even those with significantly stronger type systems than Go. That is, I think "dynamic dispatch" and "dynamic type checking" are mostly orthogonal concepts.

--- Comment #26 by apparentlymart ---
@Merovius, that is a fair observation and makes me realize that there are two conflicting interpretations here, one of which I was taking and one that you are taking:

When using interface types for dynamic dispatch of methods, the compiler checks statically that the interface has the corresponding method and that any concrete type converted to the interface type has the corresponding method. Calling the method therefore cannot panic at runtime. You are choosing to interpret `comparable` as, in essence, the presence of a special method that has no name and instead has special syntax, representing equality which the compiler is checking for.

My framing is coming from the perspective of how Go already defines `map[K]V` in the spec. I am essentially advocating for `comparable` to be defined in exactly the same way as the spec currently defines the handling of various different `K`:

> The comparison operators `==` and `!=` must be fully defined for operands of the key type; thus the key type must not be a function, map, or slice. If the key type is an interface type, these comparison operators must be defined for the dynamic key values; failure will cause a run-time panic.

I do have a bias that the primary way I've used generics so far has been to create type-safe collections where I immediately ran into this inconsistency where there seems to be no way to express with type parameters the same meaning as `map[K]V`.

I can certainly see your perspective here too. It didn't immediately resonate with me because I think of Go as being a language which intentionally opted not to have operator overloading and therefore I don't think of `==` (and its corresponding use to define map key handling) as being a method. But it could certainly be valid to consider it that way; I suppose that is the essence of the tradeoff that this growing family of proposals is trying to navigate.


--- Comment #27 by Merovius ---
> My framing is coming from the perspective of how Go already defines `map[K]V` in the spec. I am essentially advocating for `comparable` to be defined in exactly the same way as the spec currently defines the handling of various different `K`

That is, FWIW, what #52509 proposes.

This proposal is both more relaxed (in that it allows using `==` or `map[K]V` for more types, panicing at runtime) and more strict (in that it disallows instantiating `comparable` with interface types. At least AIUI).

--- Comment #28 by earthboundkid ---
Part of the reason for having type constraints in Go generics was that based on the experience of C++ (pre-concepts), we didn't want a situation where you could write a generic `F<T>()` today and have it successfully work with type C, and then tomorrow the implementation of F changes to be incompatible with C, and you get a confusing error message about it at great remove from the actual source of the problem. Unfortunately, this proposal does introduce that problem. If today `func F[T any]()` doesn't use `==` but then tomorrow it does, it can go from working with a type to panicking at runtime without a clear signal of compatibility break. At the very least the panic should explain what is going wrong and why, but it may not be caught until testing or even production. For a library, it may not be caught until who ever is using the code in an unusual way trips over the problem and files an issue.

--- Comment #29 by bcmills ---
@carlmjohnson

> If today func `F[T any]()` doesn't use `==` but then tomorrow it does, it can go from working with a type to panicking at runtime without a clear signal of compatibility break.

Functions can always break when their implementations change; the use of `==` has very little bearing on that.

To me, the thing we want to avoid is if `F[T]` can be _instantiated_ today (without a type error) and becomes a _compile-time error_ tomorrow. Because a compile-time error affects an entire package (instead of just programs with particular run-time behavior), to me that's very different from the behavior changing for a particular concrete run-time value.

--- Comment #30 by earthboundkid ---
> To me, the thing we want to avoid is if `F[T]` can be _instantiated_ today (without a type error) and becomes a _compile-time error_ tomorrow. Because a compile-time error affects an entire package (instead of just programs with particular run-time behavior), to me that's very different from the behavior changing for a particular concrete run-time value.

🤯 A certain proponent of Rust's blog post against Go was making the rounds for no particular reason yesterday, and now I'm imagining the author's head exploding when he reads someone saying that it's better to not introduce a compile time error when possible. 😄 

I do think this is a hard tradeoff. I think maybe ideally you could find a way to statically warn against calling it with go vet or something.
