==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: x/exp/slices: add First and Last

==== [Issue Body] ====
The pattern `s[len(s)-1]` appears fairly often.
However, `s[len(s)-1]` is neither readable nor easy to type,
especially if `s` is a relatively complex expression.

Thus, I propose the addition of `slices.Last` that
retrieves the last elements, respectively.
I also propose adding `slices.First` for consistency.

### Supporting evidence

Frequency of constant slice indexes relative to start or end:

| Index | Occurrences | Percentage |
| ----- | ----------- | ---------- |
| 0     | 4953854     | 41.684%    |
| 1     | 2192516     | 18.449%    |
| 2     | 1135707     | &nbsp;9.556%    |
| 3     | 1370480     | 11.532%    |
| 4     | 521199      | &nbsp;4.386%    |
| other | 1391696     | 11.710%    |
| -5    | 196         | &nbsp;0.002%    |
| -4    | 443         | &nbsp;0.004%    |
| -3    | 1682        | &nbsp;0.014%    |
| -2    | 10336       | &nbsp;0.087%    |
| -1    | 306168      | &nbsp;2.576%    |

Even though obtaining the last element is an order-of-magnitude
less frequent than getting the first element,
there are still ~300k occurences.

Of the number of cases where `s[len(s)-1]` appears,
it appears alongside `s[0]` 78% of the time.
For example:
```go
minTime, _ := extractTimeRange(lastShard.spans[0])
_, maxTime := extractTimeRange(lastShard.spans[len(lastShard.spans)-1])
```
For this reason, I propose the addition of `slices.First`,
so that these case will read naturally:
```go
minTime, _ := extractTimeRange(slices.First(lastShard.spans))
_, maxTime := extractTimeRange(slices.Last(lastShard.spans))
```

### Considerations

This API does not help the following statement:
```go
s[len(s)-1] = ...
```
since the returned value of `slices.Last` cannot be assigned to.
This occurs 32344 times (10.6%).

It also does not help the following expression:
```go
&s[len(s)-1]
```
since you cannot take the address of the return value of `slice.Last`.
This occurs 8102 times (2.6%).

To support these 13% of cases, we could have `slices.Last`
return a pointer to the element, so that you could do:
```go
*slices.Last(s) = ...
```
However, that is clunky to use.

### Alternatives

`Last` is unhelpful if you want the penultimate element (i.e., `s[len(s)-2]`),
but there are an order-of-magnitude fewer use-cases for that compared
to just getting the last element.

We could consider a Python-like indexing operation with negative indexing:
```go
// At retrieves the element at i.
// If i is negative, then it is indexed relative to the end.
func At[S ~[]E, E any](s S, i int) E
```
This provides a general-purpose way to retrieve elements relative to the end.

Negative indexing has been proposed many times in the past for slicing and was rejected
because it is easy for programming bug to go unnoticed.
Using an explicit API like `slices.At` could be clear enough signal that we truly want
negative indexing. Perhaps that is an appropriate trade-off.

I personally would like to have `At` as well,
but the evidence does not seem to indicate that it is as prevalent
compared to the need for `Last`.

\cc @ianlancetaylor @eliben 

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
Should `First` and `Last` panic for an empty slice?

--- Comment #2 by dsnet ---
> Should First and Last panic for an empty slice?

I would expect so, in the same way that `s[0]` panics for an empty slice.

--- Comment #3 by fzipp ---
> I also propose adding slices.First for consistency.

I'm not sure if symmetry is enough justification to add a function that basically does nothing of value. I find

```
minTime, _ := extractTimeRange(lastShard.spans[0])
_, maxTime := extractTimeRange(slices.Last(lastShard.spans))
```

perfectly fine.


--- Comment #4 by eliben ---
Wouldn't it be better to just implement https://github.com/golang/go/issues/25594, or a variant thereof?

`First` seems unnecessary and less readable than `[0]`, and for *just* `Last`, IMHO `[-1]` would be better.



--- Comment #5 by dsnet ---
Thanks for highlighting #25594. I like the solution that it proposes more than this proposal, but it seems that similar languages changes like it have been proposed multiple times and rejected. Barring a language change, perhaps a library change is more palatable. I would argue that the frequency that similar proposals keep getting filed indicates that this is a real pain point for users that is sufficiently common.

--- Comment #6 by dsnet ---
> IMHO [-1] would be better.

Not only is it better for readability, but it also resolves the inability for `slices.Last` to be addressed or assigned to.

--- Comment #7 by earthboundkid ---
What about `slices.At(s []T, n int) *T`? It can accept -1 for last, it returns an address, and it doesn’t have to panic if the n is out of range. If you know your slice is going to be long enough, you can just dereference without testing for nil first. 

--- Comment #8 by fzipp ---
> What about slices.At(s []T, n int) *T?

'At' would almost always only be used with negative indices, because s[i] is clearer for the other cases, so why not a 'FromEnd' function:

```
slices.FromEnd(s, 0) // last element
slices.FromEnd(s, 1) // penultimate element
...
```


--- Comment #9 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #10 by rsc ---
This feels like it starts to fight the language. 
Surely we don't want to get into arguments about whether to write s[0] or slices.First(s).
And similarly s[len(s)-1] is a clear, common idiom. 
I'm not sure that we need a function for every idiom we have, even common ones.
This doesn't seem like a win, and I worry about the slices package getting bloated.

/cc @robpike 

--- Comment #11 by dsnet ---
> This feels like it starts to fight the language.

Is #25594 up for consideration or is a language change off the table? I find #25594 a notable improvement to both writability and readability, while avoiding pitfalls with negative indexing due to integer arithmetic bugs.

--- Comment #12 by robpike ---
The comment that this is turning an idiom into a function is a good one. The addition of slices.First is unnecessary, more verbose than the idiom, except to complement slices.Last. So is Last necessary?

It can help when the slice expression is messy, but many things we do in any programming language get messy when the expression is messy. In other words, it doesn't add functionality, only convenience, and that requires a high bar that Last might not meet.

And once we have First and Last, there will be calls for Index and Nth and Last2 and LastN and so on. It's a can you might not want to open.

The philosophical question is: do we want to turn the language into this? We could have had maps and slices and so on be run with functions or methods, but we didn't. It would be sad to wake up one day and find many uses of slices eschewing the index notation.

--- Comment #13 by icholy ---
When you're dealing with a short local variable, the `s[len(s)-1]` idiom is totally fine. But it can get out of hand when accessing nested fields.

``` go
some.Nested.Values[len(some.Nested.Values)-1]
```

vs

``` go
slices.At(some.Nested.Values, -1)
```

--- Comment #14 by fzipp ---
@icholy You can always assign a long expression to a short local variable.
```
v := some.Nested.Values
v[len(v)-1]
```


--- Comment #15 by dsnet ---
> You can always assign a long expression to a short local variable.

That doesn't work if you're trying to assign into that expression and it isn't addressable.

--- Comment #16 by fzipp ---
> > You can always assign a long expression to a short local variable.
> 
> That doesn't work if you're trying to assign into that expression and it isn't addressable.

@dsnet Isn't the basis of this issue that the expression is a slice?

--- Comment #17 by dsnet ---
Ah, yes. Ignore me 😄 

--- Comment #18 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely decline](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-decline)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #19 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[declined](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

