==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: x/net/webdav: make webdav/internal/xml module public

==== [Issue Body] ====
I found the `webdav` package when I had been doing custom WebDAV server.
It looks good if you want to just serve a directory. But when you are developing WebDAV server-proxy that just calls APIs it's partially useless because you need to implement each WebDAV http method by myself. Need to implement methods, but not a response factory.

I see that the package uses [internal module `xml`](https://github.com/golang/net/tree/master/webdav/internal/xml) to create a response with right structure. It would be nice to open it for developers or split into a separated package. I would make a PR but I'm not a gopher, just a fan. 

Glad to get thoughts about the idea.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
CC @nigeltao 

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
If it's useful, feel free to copy it (subject to the license requirements of course). It seems unlikely we'll want to commit to more webdav-related API.


--- Comment #3 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #4 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely decline](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-decline)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[declined](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

