==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: cmd/dist: cli based upgrades

==== [Issue Body] ====
A number of the programming languages I use support upgrade paths built into their tooling which has made keeping up to date extremely easy. This is definitely more of a ✨nice to have✨ for developer experience.

## Benefits
- Could make upgrades easier for newcomers.
- Could make it easier for developers to stay up to date.
- Could make polyglot device management easier for teams by the CLI being able to run the upgrade.
- Could help stop human polling of `go.dev`, twitter or rss release feeds to know when a new version is out.

## Prior Art
- `flutter upgrade`
- `rustup upgrade`
- Most JavaScript frameworks provide some form of the above, i.e. `ember update` but this is little different as these are libraries/frameworks than a language.

## Example
The following example pinched from the Flutter upgrade flow:

```sh
$ go upgrade
upgrading from go1.18.2 to go1.18.3...

Downloading Go SDK...
Expanding downloaded archive...

Upgrading Go...
Go 1.18.3 • channel stable • https://github.com/golang/go.git
revision 4068be5 (28 days ago) • 2022-06-02 04:38:00 +1200
```

```sh
$ go upgrade
go is already up to date on channel stable
go version go1.18.3 windows/amd64
```

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by jacobishao ---
how often do you update go sdk? I rarely do it. maybe one year, I guess.

--- Comment #2 by ericlagergren ---
There is already `go install golang.org/dl/go1.2.3@latest`.

--- Comment #3 by mvdan ---
You could certainly build this on top of https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/dl, like @ericlagergren says. Note that there is also https://go.dev/dl/?mode=json to quickly get the information on what the latest stable version is.

I agree that a nice UX would be useful to some people, but I'm not convinced that this needs to be part of Go itself - `go install golang.org/dl/go1.18.3@latest && go1.18.3 download && go1.18.3 version` works without needing any special support in the Go toolchain, for example.

--- Comment #4 by earthboundkid ---
I worry that this would integrate poorly with package managers like Homebrew, apt, etc.

--- Comment #5 by Zerotask ---
I really like the idea of having a simple upgrade command. Go stands for simplicity but there is no simple option to upgrade itself.

What is the reason against a go upgrade?

--- Comment #6 by seankhliao ---
Duplicate of #27700

--- Comment #7 by matthewhartstonge ---
Cheers @seankhliao - tried a number of keywords but couldn't find an existing issue.

--- Comment #8 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #9 by earthboundkid ---
I think this issue should be taken off the proposals list and #27700 added in its place.

--- Comment #10 by rsc ---

This proposal is a duplicate of a previously discussed proposal, as noted above,
and there is no significant new information to justify reopening the discussion.
The issue has therefore been **[declined as a duplicate](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined-as-duplicate)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

