==== [Issue Title] ====
proposal: gofmt: allow sort

==== [Issue Body] ====
Hi,

I am not sure if this is the right place for suggesting improvements to gofmt. Anyhow, there are times when we want certain lines to be automatically sorted by gofmt. For instance:
```golang
type MyEnum int

const (
   EnumAlice MyEnum = iota
   EnumBob
   EnumCharlie
   EnumDave
   EnumEve
)
``` 
By inserting certain comments, we can instruct gofmt to sort certain lines. For example:
```golang
type MyEnum int

const (
   EnumAlice MyEnum = iota
   //sort ascending
   EnumBob
   EnumCharlie
   EnumDave
   EnumEve
   //sort end
)
``` 
or 
```golang
//sort ascending
server.RegisterPage("/users/login", pages.NewLoginPage())
server.RegisterPage("/users/logout", pages.NewLogoutPage())
server.RegisterPage("/users/profile", pages.NewProfilePage())
...
//sort end
```
To mark the beginning of the lines to be sorted, use `//sort [ascending|descending]`, and use `//sort end` to mark the end of the lines.

There is an alternative cleaner syntax, but it may be a bit tricky to implement. Use `//sort [ascending|descending]` with ascending as the default when it is not specifed. So `//sort` is a valid starting line. It ends when a blank line or non-meaningful line is encountered. For example:

```golang
type MyEnum int

const (
   EnumAlice MyEnum = iota
   //sort
   EnumBob
   EnumCharlie
   EnumDave
   EnumEve
)

//sort ascending
server.RegisterPage("/users/login", pages.NewLoginPage())
server.RegisterPage("/users/logout", pages.NewLogoutPage())
server.RegisterPage("/users/profile", pages.NewProfilePage())
...
server.RegisterPage("/pages/last", pages.LastPage())

server.Start()
```

Let me know what you think. 

Thanks.

Henry

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by mvdan ---
gofmt does not have formatting directives in the form of comments today, and I don't think it should start either.

Luckily, gofmt is a standard format with Go, so you can write a tool that applies this extra formatting step and run it after gofmt. Look at tools like `goimports`, `go fix`, or `gofumpt`, which have been used to rewrite code in useful ways that do not need to be incorporated into gofmt proper.

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
gofmt is only meant to format code. To rewrite parts of code, it is easy to use go/parser and go/printer.


--- Comment #3 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #4 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely decline](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-decline)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[declined](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#declined)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group

