=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWUzNDM0MzM0NzU= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/26535

==== [Issue Title] ====
compress/lzw: add Resetter interface to allow encoders to be reused

==== [Issue Body] ====
`compress/lzw` encoders maintain a rather large table (64k) mapping uncompressed bytes to their compressed bits. Because the encoder requires a `Close` per stream they cannot be reused for multiple streams. This means that lzw creates 64k of garbage per use, which is especially apparent when encoding animation with `image/gif`.

While we can't easily change the API in go1 to support reuse, we can greatly reduce garbage by pooling the `table` parameter of encoders. I prototyped this behavior and got the following benchmarks:

```
name           old time/op    new time/op    delta
Encoder/1e4-8     108µs ± 1%     109µs ± 2%   +1.25%  (p=0.008 n=9+10)
Encoder/1e5-8    1.06ms ± 2%    1.11ms ± 2%   +4.15%  (p=0.000 n=10+9)
Encoder/1e6-8    10.5ms ± 2%    11.0ms ± 2%   +4.37%  (p=0.000 n=10+9)

name           old speed      new speed      delta
Encoder/1e4-8  93.0MB/s ± 1%  91.8MB/s ± 2%   -1.23%  (p=0.008 n=9+10)
Encoder/1e5-8  94.1MB/s ± 2%  90.4MB/s ± 2%   -3.98%  (p=0.000 n=10+9)
Encoder/1e6-8  95.2MB/s ± 2%  91.3MB/s ± 2%   -4.18%  (p=0.000 n=10+9)

name           old alloc/op   new alloc/op   delta
Encoder/1e4-8    77.9kB ± 0%     4.4kB ± 0%  -94.35%  (p=0.000 n=10+9)
Encoder/1e5-8    77.9kB ± 0%     4.4kB ± 0%  -94.33%  (p=0.000 n=10+10)
Encoder/1e6-8    77.9kB ± 0%     5.0kB ± 0%  -93.60%  (p=0.000 n=10+10)

name           old allocs/op  new allocs/op  delta
Encoder/1e4-8      3.00 ± 0%      4.00 ± 0%  +33.33%  (p=0.000 n=10+10)
Encoder/1e5-8      3.00 ± 0%      4.00 ± 0%  +33.33%  (p=0.000 n=10+10)
Encoder/1e6-8      3.00 ± 0%      4.00 ± 0%  +33.33%  (p=0.000 n=10+10)
```
(Note that these are on top of my existing CL https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/go/+/123478 that improves time/op significantly)

I don't see much use of pools in the standard library, is this not generally a good approach? Even if it is, is the memory overhead worth it for the 4% performance increase?

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by dsnet ---
Pools have subtle properties that affect their performance (see #23199 and #22950). While #23199 isn't an issue here since the object is fixed size, #22950 can have adverse affect in all usages of pools in certain workloads.

That being said, why do you say:
> While we can't easily change the API in go1 to support reuse

Is that because the API returns `io.ReadCloser` and `io.WriteCloser`? A similar problem existed for `compress/flate` and it was resolved by defining the [`flate.Resetter`](https://golang.org/pkg/compress/flate/#Resetter) interface.

--- Comment #2 by bcmills ---
A pool seems like a poor fit for this use-case, since the `lzw`'s `ReadCloser` and `WriteCloser` implementations are not documented to be safe for concurrent use anyway: a pool would add a contended cache line for an API that otherwise needs no cross-core synchronization.

A `Resetter` interface seems preferable.

--- Comment #3 by ericpauley ---
Thanks for the insight, a `Resetter` interface definitely seems like the way to go.

There's also the question of `compress/lzw`'s main consumer, `image/gif`. As intended, this would reduce the allocation of multi-frame gif encoding significantly. (With a few internal modifications to persist the writer between calls to `writeImageBlock`. This wouldn't have any impact on the single-frame case, and wouldn't completely remove allocation from `gif.EncodeAll`. 

One option would be for `image/gif` to have an `lzw` encoder `Pool`. Since all encoder use is internal there wouldn't be the same interface concerns as within `lzw`. Since there's no persistent encoder object there doesn't seem to be a good way to implement a `Resetter` interface like with `lzw`.

Maybe 64k garbage is okay for an image encoder, in which case the `lzw` change may be enough. (Personally I'd prefer that `image/gif` be near 0 quiescent allocation but that's for a niche use case)

--- Comment #4 by agnivade ---
Stumbled on this while looking at some heap profiles generated from using https://github.com/hashicorp/memberlist. Adding the `Resetter` interface works for the general use-case of the library. Will look into sending a CL.

--- Comment #5 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/273667 mentions this issue: `compress/lzw: add Reset method to allow encoders to be reused`

--- Comment #6 by rsc ---
We clearly did a bad job with all the compress APIs. We should not have returned interfaces from the constructors. For example we got zlib.NewWriter correct - it returns a \*zlib.Writer. But we got zlib.Reader wrong - it returns an io.ReadCloser. When we wanted to add a Reset method to the underlying reader, we had no way to expose it, so we added the zlib.Resetter interface with a guarantee that the resulting io.ReadCloser _also_ implemented zlib.Resetter.

That's being proposed here for lzw, but on the Writer side, not the Reader side. It bothers me a bit that flate.Resetter and zlib.Resetter are both Read-side Resetters while this would be a Write-side Resetter. What happens when we want to Reset the lzw reader as well?

An alternative to defining these new interfaces would be to define the actual concrete type structs - \*lzw.Reader and \*lzw.Writer - and then document that the results from lzw.NewReader and lzw.NewWriter are guaranteed to be type-assert-able to those actual concrete types. Then any new methods we need could be added there without any new interfaces, and in particular without a different interface for reading and writing and a different interface for each new method.

Any thoughts about that alternative (defining the Reader and Writer structs for the package and documenting that the interfaces can be type-asserted to them, and then adding Reset as struct methods)?



--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
/cc @nigeltao 

--- Comment #8 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #9 by ericpauley ---
For completeness, I can imagine two other (potentially poor) approaches:

- Create new constructors that return the concrete structs directly. This has the advantage of no implicit type guarantees to be documented, though there is the obvious downside of an additional method.
- Allow direct instantiation of the concrete structs (similar to bytes.Buffer). This removes the need for an additional method or type cast, but there is no way to allow setting fields at construction without making them mutable, which could lead to nonsensical states.

--- Comment #10 by rsc ---
It's true that if we have structs that can be declared and initialized (by the Reset method) they would stand alone.
It seems like we should probably still define that the functions also return those implementations. 
So the proposal would be:

```
// guarantee to return a *Reader
func NewReader(r io.Reader, order Order, litWidth int) io.ReadCloser

// guarantee to return a *Writer
func NewWriter(w io.Writer, order Order, litWidth int) io.WriteCloser

type Reader struct { ... unexported ... }
func (r *Reader) Reset(input io.Reader, order Order, litWidth int) 
func (r *Reader) Read([]byte) (int, error)
func (r *Reader) Close() error

type Writer struct { ... unexported ... }
func (w *Writer) Reset(output io.Writer, order Order, litWidth int) 
func (w *Writer) Write([]byte) (int, error)
func (w *Writer) Close() error
```

Any objections to this approach?


--- Comment #11 by dsnet ---
The asymmetry with `compress/flate` is unfortunate, but it's better than defining `WriterRestter` and `ReaderResetter` interface types.

--- Comment #12 by andig ---
@rsc why not return a *Writer and guarantee that it always fulfills WriteCloser? That would be compatible and usable without type assertion?

--- Comment #13 by ericpauley ---
@andig Would this technically violate the compatibility guarantee, since a function variable/argument typed for the current signature would no longer accept the new signature? E.g.:

`var f func(r io.Reader, order lzw.Order, litWidth int) io.ReadCloser = lzw.NewReader`

would break under this proposed type signature.

--- Comment #14 by andig ---
Guess it would 😣

--- Comment #15 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #16 by ericpauley ---
While playing around with this I noticed that NewReader/NewWriter currently return a separate struct (`errWriteCloser`) on errors, which returns an error later when written/read. This doesn't necessarily require a change to the above APIs, but the separate struct will need to be incorporated into the Reader/Writer struct as an `err` struct member or similar, so that `Reset` can set errors on the struct (since it can't return this pseudo-reader/writer).

--- Comment #17 by agnivade ---
@rsc - Just wanted to clarify a small detail on the Reset methods: do we want to pass the order and litWidth to `Reset` or just let them be whatever they were when the Reader/Writer was created?

It seems like there is some inconsistency amongst the various Reset APIs on this one.
- [gzip.(*Writer).Reset](https://golang.org/pkg/compress/gzip/#Writer.Reset) does not take the compression level.
- [flate.(*Writer).Reset](https://golang.org/pkg/compress/flate/#Writer.Reset) does not take the compression level and dictionary.
- But [flate.Resetter](https://golang.org/pkg/compress/flate/#Resetter) interface _does_ take the dictionary.



--- Comment #18 by dsnet ---
In my opinion, it was a mistake for `gzip` and `flate` to not take in more options. There have been times where I needed to reset them with different settings and was unable to. I think we should avoid the same mistake when adding reset functionality to `lzw`.

--- Comment #19 by ericpauley ---
To @dsnet's point, removing these parameters from `Reset` would also prohibit direct instantiation (then `Reset`ing) the structs (unless these values had some default value)

--- Comment #20 by nigeltao ---
> Any objections to this approach?

LGTM.

--- Comment #21 by rsc ---
To answer @agnivade's comment, it sounds like @dsnet and @nigeltao agree to include all the options in Reset, as in the [comment above](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/26535#issuecomment-763838290). 

--- Comment #22 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group

--- Content after FINAL acceptance decision removed ---