=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWUzNjgwMzYzMDU= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/28089

==== [Issue Title] ====
go/ast: add func IsGenerated(*File) bool

==== [Issue Body] ====
Given that #13560 has been accepted, resolved, and by now, widely accepted by the Go community, I think it can be helpful to have a Go parser for it that tools written in Go could use (if desired).

It's relatively easy to write an ad hoc parser using the `regexp` package, but it's also possible to write a more specialized one that has less overhead.

I already wrote one a while ago, and it currently lives at [`github.com/shurcooL/go/generated`](https://godoc.org/github.com/shurcooL/go/generated).

I want to move it out of the repository it's currently in, which contains [many miscellaneous Go packages](https://github.com/shurcooL/go#directories) of lower utility and quality. I was originally planning to move it out into a standalone repository on my personal site, but then I thought it might be a good fit under `x/tools` subrepo, specifically, in the [`x/tools/go` directory](https://godoc.org/golang.org/x/tools/go), since it deals with Go code. The proposed import path would be:

```Go
import "golang.org/x/tools/go/generated"
```

Hence this proposal. If accepted, I'm happy to maintain it/be the owner. The scope is very narrow, so it should be very low volume of work.

Not sure how this intersects with #17244.

If not accepted, I would likely move it here instead:

```Go
import "dmitri.shuralyov.com/go/generated"
```

(The code is currently MIT licensed, but in either case, I'd relicense it under the [Go license](https://golang.org/LICENSE).)

/cc @andybons @bradfitz @alandonovan @matloob @ianthehat

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by mvdan ---
Is the only concern about the regular expression its speed? If so, I'd rather improve the speed of regexp instead. There are some performance issues for the package already, so one of them may already cover this particular expression: #11646 #26623 #21463

I realise that the regex package may take a while to be fast even for this one case, but I don't think there's a sense of urgency to have a faster implementation of it in `x/tools`.

--- Comment #2 by alandonovan ---
Can the predicate be expressed as a function of the AST? Very often the tools that need this predicate have already parsed the file. 

```
package astutil

// Generated reports whether the file was generated by a program,
// not handwritten, following the conventions described in #13560.
// The syntax tree must have been invoked with the ParseComment flag.
// Example:
//   f, err := parser.ParseFile(fset, filename, parser.ParseComment|parser.ImportOnly)
//   if err != nil { ... }
//   g := Generated(f)
func Generated(f *ast.File) bool { ... }
```

It seems like a good fit for the x/tools/go/astutil package since it doesn't add any dependencies.


--- Comment #3 by alandonovan ---
Regular expressions are great for experimenting with complicated patterns, but you don't need the regexp package for an expression this trivial:

```
strings.HasPrefix(line, "// Code generated ") && strings.HasSuffix(line, " DO NOT EDIT.")
```

--- Comment #4 by mark-rushakoff ---
This POSIX-compliant grep command has worked fine for my needs in shell scripts:

```
grep -Exq '^// Code generated .* DO NOT EDIT\.$' "$file"
# Exits 0 if $file matches.
```

In my case, I'm not concerned about a false positive of that line occurring in a block comment or in a raw string literal.

--- Comment #5 by dmitshur ---
> Is the only concern about the regular expression its speed?

No. I wanted to avoid the `regexp` dependency because it was easy to implement the matching behavior myself.

The `regexp` package can still be optimized independently of this code.

> Can the predicate be expressed as a function of the AST?

Good question. I'd be curious to try. I expect it should be possible, but I'm not sure if it'd be faster.

Note that not only comments would have to be checked in the AST, but raw string literals as well. A .go file with the following code needs to be reported as a positive match for the pattern:

```Go
package p

import "fmt"

func Foo() {
	const s = `this is a raw string literal. it happens to contain
some text in column 1, including a string that matches
the "Code generated ... DO NOT EDIT." comment, like so:
// Code generated  DO NOT EDIT.
to product a correct result, it needs to be detected`
	fmt.Println(len(s))
}
```

Since it does in fact contain a line of text that matches the regular expression `^// Code generated .* DO NOT EDIT\.$`.

> This POSIX-compliant grep command has worked fine for my needs in shell scripts:

Indeed. It's very quick and easy to implement a parser for https://golang.org/s/generatedcode format in any language that has support for regular expressions. This package is meant to be available for use by tools that are written in Go, and prefer to avoid incurring the cost of spawning a process or importing the `regexp` package.

> In my case, I'm not concerned about a false positive of that line occurring in a block comment or in a raw string literal.

Those are not false positives. According to the spec, a file is considered generated if a matching line of text appears anywhere in the file, which can include block comments and raw string literals.

--- Comment #6 by mark-rushakoff ---
> Those are not false positives.

Good to know that grepping this way shouldn't hit any false positives then :)

> This package is meant to be available for use by tools that are written in Go

Anecdotally: my most frequent case for needing to check whether a file is auto-generated has been to manually filter through `go list` output in a shell script, to decide whether a file should be run through `go fmt`. So for me, it would be more helpful if I could use `{{if .Generated}}` as part of a template passed to `go list -f`. But changing `go list` is not this issue.

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
This would be a 1-declaration 1-line package. We try to avoid those. Please propose a new method or top-level function in an existing package, like probably go/ast.


--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
Ping @dmitshur; see previous comment.


--- Comment #9 by dmitshur ---
I agree with your comment @rsc that this would be a small package, and it's better to avoid that in x/tools.

I've been thinking about where this functionality could fit into existing packages, and I have some initial thoughts I can share. Please note this isn't a final proposal; just an iteration I want to share. I'm not completely happy with it and wouldn't want it implemented as is.

### WIP Counter-Proposal Revision 1

Out of the existing packages, this functionality seemed to belong most in [`go/parser`](https://godoc.org/go/parser). The API surface of the change would be somewhat large. It would involve a new [`parser.Mode`](https://godoc.org/go/parser#Mode):

```diff
// A Mode value is a set of flags (or 0).
// They control the amount of source code parsed and other optional
// parser functionality.
//
type Mode uint

const (
	PackageClauseOnly Mode             = 1 << iota // stop parsing after package clause
	ImportsOnly                                    // stop parsing after import declarations
	ParseComments                                  // parse comments and add them to AST
+	GeneratedComment                               // determine whether the file contains a "// Code generated … DO NOT EDIT." line comment
	Trace                                          // print a trace of parsed productions
	DeclarationErrors                              // report declaration errors
	SpuriousErrors                                 // same as AllErrors, for backward-compatibility
	AllErrors         = SpuriousErrors             // report all errors (not just the first 10 on different lines)
)
```

When the mode is turned on, `parser.ParseFile` would perform additional work to determine if the .go file has a "// Code generated … DO NOT EDIT." line comment.

(There is some precedent to this in the [`go/build`](https://godoc.org/go/build) package, specifically the [`ImportComment`](https://godoc.org/go/build#ImportComment) import mode.)

In order for `parser.ParseFile` to report the result, [`ast.File`](https://godoc.org/go/ast#File) in [`go/ast`](https://godoc.org/go/ast) package would also need to be modified:

```diff
// A File node represents a Go source file.
//
// [...]
type File struct {
	Doc        *CommentGroup   // associated documentation; or nil
	Package    token.Pos       // position of "package" keyword
	Name       *Ident          // package name
	Decls      []Decl          // top-level declarations; or nil
	Scope      *Scope          // package scope (this file only)
	Imports    []*ImportSpec   // imports in this file
	Unresolved []*Ident        // unresolved identifiers in this file
	Comments   []*CommentGroup // list of all comments in the source file
+	Generated  *Comment        // a "// Code generated … DO NOT EDIT." line comment; or nil
}
```

At first, this seemed like the most appropriate place in existing packages to add this functionality. However, after considering the details more closely, it doesn't seem like a good fit.

The "// Code generated … DO NOT EDIT." comment lives in parallel to the actual AST structure of a file. According to the spec, such a comment can appear inside a block comment, and it would still count. It can also appear within a raw string literal, and match. The work that must be done to determine if a .go file has such a comment has very little to do with parsing the actual AST of a .go file.

### WIP Counter-Proposal Revision 2

An alternative proposal to consider is to add this functionality to `go/build` package in the following way. Add a `GeneratedComment` import mode, similar to the existing [`build.ImportComment`](https://godoc.org/go/build#ImportComment):

```diff
 // If ImportComment is set, parse import comments on package statements.
 // Import returns an error if it finds a comment it cannot understand
 // or finds conflicting comments in multiple source files.
 // See golang.org/s/go14customimport for more information.
 ImportComment
+
+// If GeneratedComment is set, determine which .go files contain
+// a "// Code generated … DO NOT EDIT." line comment,
+// and populate GeneratedGoFiles with the results.
+// See golang.org/s/generatedcode for more information.
+GeneratedComment
```

The result would be populated in a new `build.Package` field:

```diff
type Package struct {
	// ...

	// Source files
	GoFiles          []string // .go source files (excluding CgoFiles, TestGoFiles, XTestGoFiles)
	CgoFiles         []string // .go source files that import "C"
	IgnoredGoFiles   []string // .go source files ignored for this build
	InvalidGoFiles   []string // .go source files with detected problems (parse error, wrong package name, and so on)
+	GeneratedGoFiles []string // .go source files containing a contains a "// Code generated … DO NOT EDIT." line comment; populated only if GeneratedComment mode is set
	CFiles           []string // .c source files
	// ...
```

This approach seems to be cleaner than adding something to `go/parser` and `ast.File`, but I'm not sure if it's good either. The information about whether or not a file is generated feels like it should belong at the file level, not the package level.

There's also the factor that `golang.org/x/tools/go/packages` is meant to be used instead of `go/build` by now, so adding something new to `go/build` doesn't seem like a good idea.

A "WIP Counter-Proposal Revision 3" section can/should be added where a similar approach as in revision 2 can be evaluated for the `golang.org/x/tools/go/packages` package.

### Conclusion

I would lean towards either putting this proposal on hold (or waiting to iterate on it further), or outright declining it. I made the proposal because I was planning to move the existing package, and wanted to check if there'd be a more fitting place for it in `x/tools`. It seems the existing package doesn't meet the criteria for inclusion.

Additionally, given how easy it is to parse the generated comment with just regexp, there isn't a high demand for this functionality as far as I can tell (e.g., `github.com/shurcooL/go/generated` currently has only [1 known public importer](https://godoc.org/github.com/shurcooL/go/generated?importers)), so it's unclear if the additional work of integrating it into an existing package is justified at this time.

--- Comment #10 by griesemer ---
@dmitshur Let's discuss this in person. Per @golang/proposal-review we're ok with adding a utility function iff we can decide on a good place for it and a good API.

--- Comment #11 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/158817 mentions this issue: `cmd/go: copy missing bit of documentation about code generated comment`

--- Comment #12 by rsc ---
I'm reluctant to add more fields to structs - it seems like a bit overkill.
And adding GeneratedGoFiles to go/build means removing those files from GoFiles, which would break existing users.

It seems like we could use the current parser with PackageClauseOnly | ParseComments
(or the whole file if you are not concerned about how much gets parsed)
and then just provide a 

    package ast

    func IsGenerated(f *ast.File) bool

What do you think?



--- Comment #13 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #14 by dmitshur ---
The suggestion in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/28089#issuecomment-759652604 seems good to me so far. I'll elaborate on some minor details below.

Since there's no `error` return value, I understand it would be a pre-condition that the input provided to `IsGenerated` has been computed correctly. That is, `IsGenerated` will return `false` even if the original file was actually generated, but the AST parser wasn't configured correctly (e.g., it left out ParseComments). This should be fine as long as it's documented and there's a simple usage example.

I think using `*ast.File` instead of something like `io.Reader` or `filename string` (what the [`dmitri.shuralyov.com/go/generated`](https://pkg.go.dev) API uses) makes more sense after the spec redefinition in #41196, since the entire file no longer needs to be scanned.

I wrote this package primarily as an exercise to test that it would be possible to implement a parser for the spec proposed in #13560, since that was an important goal. I haven't yet used it anywhere. pkg.go.dev [reports](https://pkg.go.dev/dmitri.shuralyov.com/go/generated?tab=importedby) one known importer in `github.com/fatih/faillint/faillint` (CC @fatih), see [faillint.go#L115-L119](https://github.com/fatih/faillint/blob/eb3cc62b577b2b0c488a41b91d49c60c676885b9/faillint/faillint.go#L115-L119). It's an `analysis.Pass` that has access to parsed AST, so this supports that `func IsGenerated(f *ast.File) bool` is a good signature.

--- Comment #15 by rsc ---
Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #16 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group

--- Content after FINAL acceptance decision removed ---