=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU0OTgyNTY5Njg= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/34527

==== [Issue Title] ====
cmd/go: add GOMODCACHE

==== [Issue Body] ====
### Summary

Add `GOMODCACHE` to control where the module download cache lives. Its default can continue to be `GOPATH[0]/pkg/mod`, and the variable would be very similar and consistent with `GOCACHE`.

### Description

The module download cache has lived in `GOPATH[0]/pkg/mod/` since it first appeared. It's understandable why it doesn't live under `GOCACHE`, where the build cache is located; builds are generally fast and reliable if one has the source, but downloading a module from the internet isn't nearly as reliable.

I also understand why it was put under `GOPATH`; until recently, it was the only persistent directory that Go made use of. That only changed in the last release, with the addition of `os.UserConfigDir()+"/go/env"` for `go env -w`.

However, there's no way to configure where the module download cache is located. For example, this is useful in CI environments to place the build and module download caches somewhere that's persisted between builds.

The only way to store the download cache elsewhere is to move `GOPATH` entirely. This has several disadvantages:

1) `GOPATH` contains much more. For many users, it still contains code. For almost everyone, it also contains the installed binaries, unless they've set `GOBIN`. It's too big of a knob to just change the location of the module download cache.

2) Many environments explicitly set `GOPATH`, such as the `golang:1.13` image, meaning that we can't simply `go env -w GOPATH=/custom/path` just like we could with `GOCACHE`. This makes the module download cache harder to deal with than the build cache, for no apparent reason.

3) `GOPATH`'s future is uncertain; it might contain more in the future, or it might go away entirely. Relying on it to set the module download cache location is not a good long-term plan.

This idea first came up in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/31283, which was closed by its author. I left a comment there a while ago,  but thought it would be better to open a new proposal.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by mvdan ---
One unfortunate side of this proposal is that `GOCACHE` seems to mean "directory holding all Go cached data", while `GOMODCACHE` would be separate. If we had a time machine, I'd argue that `GOCACHE` should be called `GOBUILDCACHE` instead.

An alternative idea is to eventually re-define `GOPATH` as a directory to store persistent data that doesn't belong in the short-lived `GOCACHE` nor in `<config>/go/env`. That would solve points 1 and 3, but not 2.

An alternative partial solution to point 2 is to stop explicitly declaring `GOPATH` in the official Docker images. That might break users who haven't switched over to `$(go env GOPATH)` to handle the default properly, but I hope that eventually the env var can be removed anyway.

--- Comment #2 by dmitshur ---
Thanks for making this proposal. I briefly recall conversations in the past that we might want to move the module cache out of $GOPATH/pkg eventually, but it's helpful to have something more actionable open.

I would like to see the module cache to not be in GOPATH in the future. If it's viable, I think a better outcome is if we can do this without adding configuration. That may not be viable.

--- Comment #3 by mvdan ---
I think we have multiple options if moving the module download cache is an option. For example:

* Put it under `GOCACHE`, since it's a cache after all - just an expensive one to rebuild. One could end up with a directory structure like `GOCACHE/build` and `GOCACHE/mod`, to separate the cheap build cache.
* Put it alongside `go-build` in `os.UserCacheDir`, for example `<go-mod>`. Though for consistency, you'd probably still require `GOMODCACHE`.

Both of these options put the expensive and cheap caches in the same place by default, though. If we want to properly separate the moduel cache from the build cache, here's another idea:

* Put it under `os.UserDataDir`, which in an ideal world would be a suitable and portable place to put non-config, non-temporary data.

--- Comment #4 by bcmills ---
CC @jayconrod 

--- Comment #5 by jayconrod ---
Adding a `GOMODCACHE` variable to control the cache location makes total sense to me.

Moving the default location of the module cache seems more disruptive. Should we have some logic that checks if `$GOPATH[0]/pkg/mod` exists, then if not, some directory in `os.UserCacheDir()`?

--- Comment #6 by mvdan ---
I think if we're happy with adding an env var, we shouldn't worry about moving the default location right now. I only replied to that point to show some thoughts that might be helpful in the long term, if we do want to move it at some point.

--- Comment #7 by shoenig ---
I found myself wanting a `GOMODCACHE` variable recently for another use case: 
If for example you have a local machine running an IDE talking to a remote server where your source tree lives mounted over NFS, Go modules are going to cause a bad time due to their use of `flock`, which NFS does not support. 
```
go: failed to lock file at /Volumes/nfs/go/pkg/mod/cache/lock
```

Of course there is a workaround by creating a dummy `GOPATH` tree on the local machine and configuring the IDE to prepend that GOPATH ahead of the real one, so that it caches modules locally. That's a rather counter-intuitive thing to do though, and a direct environment variable for controlling the `mod` directory would be a nice feature. 

--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
Please don't move the default location of the download cache into GOCACHE.
Quoting https://groups.google.com/forum/#!msg/golang-dev/RjSj4bGSmsw/KMHhU8fmAwAJ:

I understand why this would seem surprising at first, but cached compilation resuilts and cached downloaded source code are a bit different.

The build cache ($GOCACHE, defaulting to $HOME/.cache/go-build) is for storing recent compilation results, so that if you need to do that exact compilation again, you can just reuse the file. The build cache holds entries that are like "if you run this exact compiler on these exact inputs. this is the output you'd get." If the answer is not in the cache, your build uses a little more CPU to run the compiler nstead of reusing the output. But you are guaranteed to be able to run the compiler instead, since you have the exact inputs and the compiler binary (or else you couldn't even look up the answer in the cache).

The module cache ($GOPATH/src/mod, defaulting to $HOME/go/src/mod) is for storing downloaded source code, so that every build does not redownload the same code and does not require the network or the original code to be available. The module cache holds entries that are like "if you need to download mymodule@v1.2.3, here are the files you'd get." If the answer is not in the cache, you have to go out to the network. Maybe you don't have a network right now. Maybe the code has been deleted. It's not anywhere near guaranteed that you can redownload the sources and also get the same result. Hopefully you can, but it's not an absolute certainty like for the build cache. (The go.sum file will detect if you get a different answer on re-download, but knowing you got the wrong bits doesn't help you make progress on actually building your code. Also these paths end up in file-line information in binaries, so they show up in stack traces, and the like and feed into tools like text editors or debuggers that don't necessarily know how to trigger the right cache refresh.)

I expect there are cron jobs or other tools that clean $HOME/.cache periodically. If part of the build cache got deleted, it would be no big deal, so it's fine to store the build cache there. But if downloaded source code got deleted unasked, I think that would potentially be quite surprising and problematic in various ways. That's why we store the source code in $GOPATH/src/mod, to keep it away from more expendable data.



--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
Adding GOMODCACHE seems fine to me, and @jayconrod said that too. @bcmills?


--- Comment #10 by jayconrod ---
Just to echo @rsc and my earlier comment: adding `GOMODCACHE` seems fine. Let's not change the default location though.

--- Comment #11 by bcmills ---
Agreed: a `GOMODCACHE` variable seems useful enough.

The non-parallel naming with `GOCACHE` is unfortunate, but probably not unfortunate enough to warrant anything as drastic as renaming `GOCACHE` or relocating the default `GOMODCACHE`.

--- Comment #12 by mvdan ---
As a quick drive-by thought, if we want to fix the inconsistency with `GOCACHE`, we could deprecate it in favor of something like `GOBUILDCACHE`, but keep accepting `GOCACHE` as a fallback. That still wouldn't be perfect though, as it's not just the build cache, but also the test cache. So I agree that it's not worth the effort, and `GOCACHE` is good enough as it is.

--- Comment #13 by flibustenet ---
An other value of `GOMODCACHE` is to change it per project. For example to keep a different cache for volatile project and one for persistent project.
With `GOMODCACHE=./cache` it could even replace `./vendor` !  

--- Comment #14 by h12w ---
Why not call it `GOMODPATH` to avoid the unfortunate non-parallel naming? (It is not a cache like build cache or test cache, but more of a source code path like $GOPATH/src). @mvdan 

--- Comment #15 by mvdan ---
@h12w because everywhere in the docs it's called `module cache` or `module download cache`. I think "cache" is an okay name, and the cost of changing it is too high - confusing a large portion of Go developers.

--- Comment #16 by h12w ---
A module cache directory/path is a module directory/path. The word `cache` could be omitted because there are no "non-cache" directories for modules. Looking through `go env`, there are also `GOTMPDIR` and `GOTOOLDIR`, so IMHO, both `GOMODDIR` and `GOMODPATH` are okay names too. @mvdan 

--- Comment #17 by aofei ---
Since we can't use `GOCACHE`, then I think `GOMODCACHE` is our best option. Because we already have some things that are using `MODCACHE`, such as `go clean -modcache`. I think `DIR` is weird (at least we have never used) and one `GOPATH` is enough, please don't bring more `PATH`s. 😂

--- Comment #18 by mvdan ---
What @aofei said. We don't do `go mod clean -modpath` or `go mod clean -modcachepath`.

--- Comment #19 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/219538 mentions this issue: `cmd/go: allow configuring module cache directory with GOMODCACHE`

--- Comment #20 by matloob ---
Based on @jayconrod  and @bcmills's comments on the codereview, (and offline discussions I had with them) it looks like there are two unresolved issues we need to figure out before we can move forward. I'll let them correct me if I have a misunderstanding:

First, this proposal is to create a `GOMODCACHE` set to `$GOPATH/pkg/mod` by default. This leaves open the question of w here the sumdb directory goes. Currently, it lives in `$GOPATH/pkg/sumdb`. I think we wouldn't want to put the `sumdb` directory in `$GOMODCACHE/../sumdb`: it would be surprising behavior to create a new directory side-by-side with the user supplied directory name. Two alternatives would be (a) to start putting the sumdb in `$GOMODCACHE/sumdb`, and migrate over the old sumdb at `$GOPATH/pkg/mod` to the new location. The alternative is to set `GOMODCACHE` to `$GOPATH/pkg` by default, and put put the module cache in `$GOMODCACHE/mod` and the sumdb in `$GOMODCACHE/sumdb`. My preference is for the first option because the second option is a bit clunky.

The second issue isn't directly addressed in this proposal, but in our discussion, it seemed worth bringing up. Do we want to specify a relationship between the `GOMODCACHE` variable, and what we could set `GOPROXY` to be to proxy from the module cache? According to the proposal we have, it would be `GOPROXY=file://$GOMODCACHE/cache/download`.

--- Comment #21 by mvdan ---
> My preference is for the first option because the second option is a bit clunky.

I agree - as long as the migration of the old sumdb dirs is smooth.

> Do we want to specify a relationship between the `GOMODCACHE` variable, and what we could set `GOPROXY` to be to proxy from the module cache?

It seems to me like that could be decided as a separate issue, as long as we don't close that door in this proposal.

--- Comment #22 by matloob ---
Okay, @bcmills and @jayconrod, what do y'all think?

--- Comment #23 by bcmills ---
I did a bit of digging, and it looks like the relevant directories are currently:
* `GOPATH/pkg/mod` contains extracted modules.
* `GOPATH/pkg/mod/cache` contains the `download` directory and one lock file. Seems like kind of a waste of a level of directory...
* `GOPATH/pkg/mod/cache/download` contains, essentially, the “local module proxy“: cached `.zip`, `.mod`, and `.info` files.
* `GOPATH/pkg/mod/cache/download/sumdb/sum.golang.org` contains cached tile and lookup information from the checksum database.
* `GOPATH/pkg/sumdb/sum.golang.org/latest` contains the latest signed tree head from the checksum server.

If not for that last entry, I think we would pretty clearly want to slot in `GOMODCACHE` as `GOPATH/pkg/mod`, and not worry too much about the remaining nesting. However, it seems pretty unfortunate to leave that signed tree head behind.

That path comes from here:
https://github.com/golang/go/blob/1fb7d5472e8f46faaa034fe6e16ca66a1e7c766f/src/cmd/go/internal/modfetch/sumdb.go#L194-L202

It is mentioned in this part of the checksum database design doc:
https://go.googlesource.com/proposal/+/master/design/25530-sumdb.md#command-client
Unfortunately, the design doc doesn't explain _why_ that file is where it is, so I think we'll need to follow up with @FiloSottile and @rsc to figure out whether it can be safely relocated.

I suspect that the reason it is not stored within `GOPATH/pkg/mod` is so that the signed tree head is not removed by `go clean -modcache`: that way, the signed tree head never regresses. However, I do not know how important that property is to the overall design.

--- Comment #24 by FiloSottile ---
> I suspect that the reason it is not stored within `GOPATH/pkg/mod` is so that the signed tree head is not removed by `go clean -modcache`: that way, the signed tree head never regresses. However, I do not know how important that property is to the overall design.

That's correct. It's very important because it's what guarantees that the log is indeed append-only, and it's what lets us worry less about `go.sum`s outside of a module, for example. Every time that's deleted there is a window for the tree to get forked.

I'd prefer it didn't end up in a cache directory. If we are clearing `pkg/`, maybe `UserConfigDir`?

--- Comment #25 by bcmills ---
> I'd prefer it didn't end up in a cache directory. If we are clearing `pkg/`, maybe `UserConfigDir`?

`UserConfigDir` seems like a fine choice. The signed-tree-head file is small, and we already store a `go/env` file there.

However, note that `UserConfigDir` may fail if (for example) neither `HOME` nor `XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is set to a non-empty value. (We ran into trouble with that when we started requiring a build cache: see #29267.)

--- Comment #26 by jayconrod ---
I think it makes sense to move the STH out of `GOPATH`. We should avoid requiring a `GOPATH` directory in module mode. Since the STH needs to be somewhat durable, it should not be part of any cache (`GOMODCACHE`, `GOCACHE`, `UserCacheDir`). `UserConfigDir` is the only other place that makes sense.

Some open questions though:

* If `$GOPATH/pkg/mod/sumdb` already exists, should we keep it there or actually move it? What if it also exists in `UserConfigDir`, for example, because both 1.14 and 1.15 are used on a system?
* What if there is no `UserConfigDir` (`HOME` and other environment variables are not set), but `GOPATH` is set (for example, in a Docker container)? Is that an error, or should we continue using `$GOPATH/pkg/mod/sumdb`?
* What if neither `GOPATH` nor `HOME` is set? I think this is currently an error right now because there's nowhere to put the module cache.

IMO, we should move `$GOPATH/pkg/mod/sumdb` to somewhere in `UserConfigDir` if that directory is defined, but we should continue to use `$GOPATH/pkg/mod/sumdb` if `UserConfigDir` is not defined. 

--- Comment #27 by kaey ---
In alpine linux we're thinking on how to cache source archives.
For build servers it is reasonable to setup goproxy, but for maintainer dev machines it is not.

Downloaded archives go into $GOPATH/pkg/mod/cache/download and currently there is no way to alter this location, except to alter GOPATH, which is suboptimal because:
1. it contains installed binaries, sumdb and unpacked sources.
2. files in pkg/mod are created unwritable which is great for normal go development, but in APKBUILDs we want to set -modcacherw (available in go1.14) to avoid chmod-clean
3. changes in unpacked sources are undetected, unless you run "go mod verify"
4. APKBUILDs can run stuff like "go clean -modcache" that wipes everything in pkg/mod.

Obvious way for us is to make archive cache outside of GOPATH and outside of proposed here GOMODCACHE, maybe with yet another envvar.
Is this reasonable?

--- Comment #28 by kaey ---
>GOPATH/pkg/mod/cache contains the download directory and one lock file. Seems like kind of a waste of a level of directory...

There is also cache/vcs, which is created when GOPROXY=direct

--- Comment #29 by jayconrod ---
@kaey What do you mean by source archives? Like the zip files that are currently in `$GOPATH/pkg/mod/cache/download`? Could you say more about how you're using these? For example, do they need to stay in the module cache, or are they moved and distributed somewhere else? You mentioned an archive cache. Is that intended to be used as a module proxy with a `file://` URL?

--- Comment #30 by kaey ---
>What do you mean by source archives? Like the zip files that are currently in $GOPATH/pkg/mod/cache/download?

Yeah those ones.

>Could you say more about how you're using these?

We build packages for linux distro and want to avoid redownloading sources for every rebuild. Any method will do actually and for servers (builders and ci) setting GOPROXY seems optimal to me. Currently altering GOPATH to a shared location is usable (but see my previous message), but usually it's set inside temporary build dir, which is cleaned when build is done.

>are they moved and distributed somewhere else

GOPROXY seems optimal for this usecase, so no, it just have to be some local shared space to be reused across different builds by `go build` directly via GOPROXY=file://... or some other way

>Is that intended to be used as a module proxy with a file:// URL

Not really, but it is a possibility. If we had a way to run something like `go mod download` during our `fetch()` phase that would put zips in a specified directory without unpacking them, then we'd be able to set GOPROXY=file:// during `build()` and `test()` phases.

