=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU1MTAxNTcyODA= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/35044

==== [Issue Title] ====
crypto/x509: add CertPool.Clone

==== [Issue Body] ====
I have a program that creates a custom certificate pool in several steps, loading various certificates that have different levels of access to the resources in the program.  I would like to use one of the earlier stages as a separate certificate pool to ensure that only certificates from that pool can access a particular port. 

Unfortunately the best solution seems to be to load the certificates twice since there is no way to clone pools. I see this has been suggested a number of times before, although each time the particular application suggested has been solved by a different method. The code to do this is already there in the copy method: I'm just suggesting we upper-case it. 

See the very closely related:
https://github.com/golang/go/issues/24540

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by dmitshur ---
/cc @FiloSottile @frankgreco

--- Comment #2 by FiloSottile ---
@golang/proposal-review, this would be a good thing to land in Go 1.19 along with CertPool.Equal #46057 and it's pretty easy after the Go 1.18 changes. /cc @golang/security 

--- Comment #3 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #4 by rsc ---
Does anyone object to adding this?


--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #6 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group

--- Content after FINAL acceptance decision removed ---