=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU2MjE5NjgzNjQ= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/39178

==== [Issue Title] ====
net/http: make DNS lookup timeouts return net.DNSError instead of poll.TimeoutError

==== [Issue Body] ====
I get DNS lookup timeouts many times a day when running Go HTTP clients on Kubernetes, where UDP packets are sometimes dropped due to a race condition in the Linux kernel. I'd like to propose a small standard library change to help debug these scenarios.

### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
$ go version
go version go1.14.3 linux/amd64
</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?

Yes. This occurs in Go 1.14.[1-3] and <code>version devel +c88f6989e1 Tue May 19 04:10:43 2020 +0000 linux/amd64</code>.
 
### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?

It seems to apply to all platforms. I'm experiencing it most often on Kubernetes on Linux but the executable is compiled on a regular Linux server.

<details><summary><code>go env</code> Output</summary><br><pre>
$ go env
GO111MODULE=""
GOARCH="amd64"
GOBIN=""
GOCACHE="/home/mhale/.cache/go-build"
GOENV="/home/mhale/.config/go/env"
GOEXE=""
GOFLAGS=""
GOHOSTARCH="amd64"
GOHOSTOS="linux"
GOINSECURE=""
GONOPROXY=""
GONOSUMDB=""
GOOS="linux"
GOPATH="/home/mhale/go"
GOPRIVATE=""
GOPROXY="https://proxy.golang.org,direct"
GOROOT="/usr/local/go"
GOSUMDB="sum.golang.org"
GOTMPDIR=""
GOTOOLDIR="/usr/local/go/pkg/tool/linux_amd64"
GCCGO="gccgo"
AR="ar"
CC="gcc"
CXX="g++"
CGO_ENABLED="1"
GOMOD=""
CGO_CFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_CPPFLAGS=""
CGO_CXXFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_FFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_LDFLAGS="-g -O2"
PKG_CONFIG="pkg-config"
GOGCCFLAGS="-fPIC -m64 -pthread -fmessage-length=0 -fdebug-prefix-map=/tmp/go-build197760953=/tmp/go-build -gno-record-gcc-switches"
</pre></details>

### What did you do?

For any http.Client use with a timeout set on the transport, when the timeout is exceeded and an error is returned it can be challenging to discover the cause of the timeout from the error message. Is it DNS related or TCP related or something else? Consider the following simulation of a DNS lookup that does not return within the timeout.

<details>
    <summary>DNS lookup timeout simulator code</summary>

```go
package main
  
import (
    "context"
    "net"
    "net/http"
    "time"
)

var timeout = 50 * time.Millisecond
var host = "http://example.com/"

// delayedDialer introduces a delay when performing DNS lookups.
func delayedDialer(ctx context.Context, network, address string) (net.Conn, error) {
    time.Sleep(2 * timeout)
    d := net.Dialer{}
    return d.DialContext(ctx, network, address)
}

func main() {
    r := &net.Resolver{
        PreferGo: true,
        Dial:     delayedDialer,
    }
    tr := &http.Transport{
        DialContext: (&net.Dialer{
            Timeout:  timeout,
            Resolver: r,
        }).DialContext,
    }
    client := &http.Client{Transport: tr}
    _, err := client.Get(host)
    if err != nil {
        panic(err)
    }
}
```
</details>

In the event of a DNS lookup timeout, the output is:

<pre>panic: Get "http://example.com/": dial tcp: i/o timeout</pre>

In the event of a TCP connection timeout (comment out the <code>time.Sleep()</code> call) the output is:

<pre>panic: Get "http://example.com/": dial tcp 93.184.216.34:80: i/o timeout</pre>

The missing IP address in the DNS lookup timeout output is the only clue that the root cause is a DNS problem, rather than a TCP problem. If users do not expect to see an IP address in that error message, they won't know it is missing, and their debugging and testing effort may be wasted investigating possible TCP-related causes, instead of investigating DNS (which normally runs over UDP).

I think the error message could communicate the root cause to users more clearly.

### What did you expect to see?

<pre>panic: Get "http://example.com/": dial tcp: lookup example.com: i/o timeout</pre>

### What did you see instead?

<pre>panic: Get "http://example.com/": dial tcp: i/o timeout</pre>

### Proposed solution

After a DNS lookup timeout, the error returned by <code>client.Get()</code> looks like this in Go 1.14.3:

```go
&url.Error{
  Op:  "Get",
  URL: "http://example.com/",
  Err: &net.OpError{
    Op:     "dial",
    Net:    "tcp",
    Source: nil,
    Addr:   nil,
    Err:    &poll.TimeoutError{},
  },
}
```

Note: The &poll.TimeoutError{} will become &net.timeoutError{} in future releases after commit
https://github.com/golang/go/commit/d422f54619b5b6e6301eaa3e9f22cfa7b65063c8.

The resolver in [net/lookup.go](https://github.com/golang/go/blob/master/src/net/lookup.go#L316) is the source of the <code>*poll.TimeoutError</code>. Instead it could return a <code>*net.DNSError</code> error when a lookup times out. Doing so would provide additional error context for all use cases (not only http.Client) and may save debugging time. For example <code>client.Get()</code> could return:

```go
&url.Error{
  Op:  "Get",
  URL: "http://example.com/",
  Err: &net.OpError{
    Op:     "dial",
    Net:    "tcp",
    Source: nil,
    Addr:   nil,
    Err:    &net.DNSError{
      Err:         "i/o timeout",
      Name:        "example.com",
      Server:      "",
      IsTimeout:   true,
      IsTemporary: false,
      IsNotFound:  false,
    },
  },
}
```

This would preserve the existing "i/o timeout" string and the ability to call <code>err.Timeout()</code>, while adding "lookup example.com: " to the output and the capability to explicitly check for a <code>*net.DNSError</code>. The output from my simulator would also be what I'm expecting to see:

<pre>panic: Get "http://example.com/": dial tcp: lookup example.com: i/o timeout</pre>

The following change to implement this works in my usage and passes the tests in <code>all.bash</code>.

<details><summary><code>git diff</code> Output</summary><br><pre>
$ git diff
diff --git a/src/net/lookup.go b/src/net/lookup.go
index 5f7119872a..b1a22dd4e6 100644
--- a/src/net/lookup.go
+++ b/src/net/lookup.go
@@ -314,6 +314,9 @@ func (r *Resolver) lookupIPAddr(ctx context.Context, network, host string) ([]IP
                        }()
                }
                err := mapErr(ctx.Err())
+               if t, ok := err.(timeout); ok && t.Timeout() {
+                       err = &DNSError{Err: err.Error(), Name: host, IsTimeout: true}
+               }
                if trace != nil && trace.DNSDone != nil {
                        trace.DNSDone(nil, false, err)
                }</pre></details>

I can submit a pull request if anyone thinks that this is a good idea and implementation.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
/cc @neild and @ianlancetaylor for thoughts


--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
It looks like if we change the error on that code path to be a net.DNSError, then we would lose [what Go 1.15 established](https://golang.org/doc/go1.15#net), that you can use errors.Is(err, os.ErrDeadlineExceeded) to check for the exceeded deadline. That seems like a mistake.


--- Comment #4 by mhale ---
errors.Is(err, os.ErrDeadlineExceeded) currently returns false for net.timeoutError despite a deadline being exceeded. I'm not sure if any capability would be lost when DNS times out.

--- Comment #5 by ianlancetaylor ---
@mhale You're right.  What we did in 1.15 was establish that `errors.Is(err, os.ErrDeadlineExceeded)` works for timeouts due to explicit calls to `SetDeadline` and friends.  We did not do that for timeouts due to context expiration or DNS timeouts.  Or, for that matter, TCP timeouts.

Making the proposed change seems reasonable to me.

--- Comment #6 by neild ---
Making this a `net.DNSError` seems reasonable to me. `DNSError.Timeout` should be `false`, however, since this error doesn't result from an explicit timeout set by `SetDeadline` or similar.

--- Comment #7 by mhale ---
If `DNSError.IsTimeout` is `false`, then `DNSError.Timeout()` will return `false` despite the Err string being "i/o timeout" and the error resulting from a timeout being set on the Dialer. That might clash with expectations.

--- Comment #8 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #9 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group

--- Content after FINAL acceptance decision removed ---