=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU3NDE1MjIwNTE= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/42537

==== [Issue Title] ====
strings: add CutPrefix and CutSuffix

==== [Issue Body] ====
Inspired by #40135, I have another proposal for an addition to the strings package (and by extension, I suppose, the bytes package).

The strings functions I most frequently wish for are variants of `TrimPrefix` and `TrimSuffix` which report whether they did any trimming.

```
// TrimmedPrefix returns s without the provided leading prefix string
// and reports whether it found the prefix.
// If s doesn't start with prefix, TrimmedPrefix returns s, false.
// If prefix is the empty string, TrimmedPrefix returns s, true.
func TrimmedPrefix(s, prefix string) (trimmed string, ok bool)
```

Lacking these functions, Go authors resort to fragile code, often writing a prefix/suffix literal twice or hard-coding its length:

```
if strings.HasPrefix(s, "myprefix") {
	s = strings.TrimPrefix(s, "myprefix")
	...
}
```

```
if strings.HasPrefix(s, "myprefix") {
	s = s[len("myprefix"):]
	...
}
```

```
if strings.HasPrefix(s, "myprefix") {
	s = s[8:]
	...
}
```

```
if t := strings.TrimPrefix(s, "myprefix"); s != t {
	// had prefix
	s = t
	...
}
```

Of course, a function like `TrimmedPrefix` is easy to write and can exist outside of the standard library. At my company we have these functions in an internal string helper package and they see regular use. But certainly I wouldn't pull in a dependency for such a tiny helper function and so when I'm working on my own projects I generally just use the above workarounds.

---

Here are some examples from the Go source tree along with how they could be altered to use `TrimmedPrefix`/`TrimmedSuffix`:

* `src/cmd/go/internal/modload/load.go`:

  ```
  if strings.HasPrefix(suffix, "/vendor/") {
  	return strings.TrimPrefix(suffix, "/vendor/")
  }
  ```

  becomes

  ```
  if v, ok := strings.TrimmedPrefix(suffix, "/vendor/"); ok {
  	return v
  }
  ```

* `src/cmd/go/proxy_test.go`:

  ```
  if !strings.HasSuffix(name, ".txt") {
  	continue
  }
  name = strings.TrimSuffix(name, ".txt")
  ```

  becomes

  ```
  name, ok := strings.TrimmedSuffix(name, ".txt")
  if !ok {
  	continue
  }
  ```

* `src/testing/benchmark.go`:

  ```
  if strings.HasSuffix(s, "x") {
  	n, err := strconv.ParseInt(s[:len(s)-1], 10, 0)
  	...
  }
  ```

  becomes

  ```
  if s, ok := strings.TrimmedSuffix(s, "x"); ok {
  	n, err := strconv.ParseInt(s, 10, 0)
  	...
  }
  ```

* `src/testing/fstest/mapfs.go`:

  ```
  if strings.HasPrefix(fname, prefix) {
  	felem := fname[len(prefix):]
  	...
  }
  ```

  becomes

  ```
  if felem, ok := strings.TrimmedPrefix(fname, prefix); ok {
  	...
  }
  ```

* `src/mime/mediatype.go`:

  ```
  if !strings.HasPrefix(rest, ";") {
  	return "", "", v
  }

  rest = rest[1:] // consume semicolon
  ```

  becomes

  ```
  rest, ok := strings.TrimmedPrefix(rest, ";")
  if !ok {
  	return "", "", v
  }
  ```

* `test/run.go`:

  ```
  if strings.HasPrefix(line, "//") {
  	line = line[2:]
  } else {
  	continue
  }
  ```

  becomes

  ```
  line, ok := strings.TrimmedPrefix(line, "//")
  if !ok {
  	continue
  }
  ```

* `test/run.go`:

  ```
  if strings.HasPrefix(m, "LINE+") {
  	delta, _ := strconv.Atoi(m[5:])
  	n += delta
  	...
  }
  ```

  becomes

  ```
  if d, ok := strings.TrimmedPrefix(m, "LINE+"); ok {
  	delta, _ := strconv.Atoi(d)
  	n += delta
  	...
  }
  ```

* `src/runtime/testdata/testprog/traceback_ancestors.go`:

  ```
  if strings.HasPrefix(tb[pos:], "goroutine ") {
  	id := tb[pos+len("goroutine "):]
  	...
  }
  ```

  becomes

  ```
  if id, ok := strings.TrimmedPrefix(tb[pos:], "goroutine "); ok {
  	...
  }
  ```

---

**Update 2022-03-26:** Changed proposed names to `TrimmedPrefix`/`TrimmedSuffix` (per @ianlancetaylor's suggestion).

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
`TrimmedPrefix` and `TrimmedSuffix` ?

--- Comment #2 by mvdan ---
I find `if t := strings.TrimPrefix(s, "myprefix"); s != t {` reasonable, but that might just be because I've gotten used to the pattern. One argument in favor of it not being descriptive/intuitive enough is that it's not completely winning over alternatives like `HasPrefix`+`TrimPrefix`.

--- Comment #3 by jimmyfrasche ---
`CutPrefix` and `CutSuffix` so they group with the proposed `Cut` in docs?

--- Comment #4 by rsc ---
It's unclear whether we need these, but at the very least we'd need better names.
Adding to the minutes in hopes that someone will come up with better names.


--- Comment #5 by narqo ---
(With all respect) It feels the proposal lacks the use cases where the new functions required. Knowing that the current implementation of both `strings.TrimPrefix` and `strings.TrimSuffix` is the following

```
func TrimPrefix(s, prefix string) string {
	if HasPrefix(s, prefix) {
		return s[len(prefix):]
	}
	return s

}
```

can't one always use `TrimPrefix` for all the samples from the issue's description, dropping Has-checks? I.e.

```diff
- if strings.HasPrefix(suffix, "/vendor/") {
- 	return strings.TrimPrefix(suffix, "/vendor/")
- }
+ return strings.TrimPrefix(suffix, "/vendor/")
```

--- Comment #6 by cespare ---
@narqo no. The places where you use `TrimSuffix2` do something *different* if the test string contains the prefix/suffix.

For example, you suggested

> ```diff
> - if strings.HasPrefix(suffix, "/vendor/") {
> - 	return strings.TrimPrefix(suffix, "/vendor/")
> - }
> + return strings.TrimPrefix(suffix, "/vendor/")
> ```

but those are not the same thing, because your version returns if `suffix` does not start with `"/vendor/"` and the original does not.

I listed the filenames that all my examples come from. You can go check out that example [in context](https://github.com/golang/go/blob/a19c925eda6987d91f316639db2ce774725f7a1a/src/cmd/go/internal/modload/load.go#L548-L551) and you'll see it looks like this:

```
if strings.HasPrefix(suffix, "/vendor/") {
	return strings.TrimPrefix(suffix, "/vendor/")
}
return targetPrefix + suffix
```

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
Putting on hold with Cut.


--- Comment #8 by cespare ---
I adopted @ianlancetaylor's suggested names.

In the intervening time since filing this proposal, I haven't thought of a better name. But I've used these functions constantly, and I've ended up copy-pasting them into many of my projects.

--- Comment #9 by cespare ---
@rsc Cut has been proposed, accepted, and implemented. Can we un-hold this proposal now?

--- Comment #10 by ianlancetaylor ---
Moved out of proposal-hold.

Do these add enough value over just using `Cut`?

--- Comment #11 by cespare ---
@ianlancetaylor I'm not sure I see how `Cut` changes things here.

To me, using `Cut` for any of these purposes seems pretty awkward. Taking one of the examples (from `src/cmd/go/proxy_test.go`):

```
if !strings.HasSuffix(name, ".txt") {
	continue
}
name = strings.TrimSuffix(name, ".txt")
```

With `TrimmedSuffix`, it is:

```
name, ok := strings.TrimmedSuffix(name, ".txt")
if !ok {
	continue
}
```

Using `Cut`, I guess it would be

```
name, extra, ok := strings.Cut(name, ".txt")
if !ok || extra != "" {
	continue
}
```

Is that what you had in mind? To me, that is much less clear (since it doesn't say "suffix").

If I had to write this using only the strings functions that exist today, I wouldn't use `Cut`. I'd probably do something like this:

```
trimmed := strings.TrimSuffix(name, ".txt")
if trimmed == name {
	continue
}
name = trimmed
```

That at least says "suffix" and it avoids writing the suffix string (".txt") twice, but it requires an extra line and a separate string variable in comparison with the `TrimmedSuffix` version.

--- Comment #12 by rsc ---
Cut doesn't change things but these seem remarkably minor. HasPrefix works well for this use case.


--- Comment #13 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #14 by rsc ---
It doesn't seem like these are providing enough value to add to the standard library. Does anyone want to make a case for accepting?


--- Comment #15 by cespare ---
The reasoning for why this belongs in the standard library has two parts.

**These functions are improvements over various poor patterns that people write in their absence.**

Without `Trimmed(Prefix|Suffix)`, people write code that is less clear, longer, more repetitive, and more prone to errors when being changed. The proposal at the top gives many concrete examples so I won't rehash them here. It seems obvious that writing the same string constant multiple times, or hardcoding its length, is not great. HasPrefix does *not* always "work well for this use case."

**These functions improve a large number of sites.**

I didn't address frequency of use in my original proposal so I took a quick skim now. Using the Go source tree (and just grep, so these numbers are a little rough):

| Calls                          | Count |
|--------------------------------|-------|
| All `strings` function calls   |  4843 |
| `strings.Has(Prefix\|Suffix)`  |  1029 |
| `strings.Trim(Prefix\|Suffix)` |   192 |

So `(Has|Trim)(Prefix|Suffix)` make up a quarter of all `strings` function calls. (I checked a large private code base and it was fairly similar; about 22%.)

Then I examined a random sampling of 50 `strings.Has(Prefix|Suffix)` calls and 50 `strings.Trim(Prefix|Suffix)` calls.

For `strings.Has(Prefix|Suffix)`:

* 4/50 use `strings.Trim(Prefix|Suffix)` as well
* 10/50 use other separate trimming code
* A total of 14/50 = 28% of sites can be improved with `Trimmed(Prefix|Suffix)`.

For `strings.Trim(Prefix|Suffix)`:

* 12/50 use `strings.Has(Prefix|Suffix)` as well
* 3/50 use other separate checking code
* A total of 15/50 = 30% of sites can be improved with `Trimmed(Prefix|Suffix)`.

Extrapolating from these samples, I estimate that 288/1029 calls to `Has(Prefix|Suffix)` and 58/192 calls to `Trim(Prefix|Suffix)` can be improved with `Trimmed(Prefix|Suffix)`. This totals to a little over 7% of all uses of `strings`.

By way of comparison, the repo contains 115 uses of `strings.Cut` (this is after https://go.dev/cl/351711 which rewrote Index/IndexByte/IndexRune/Split/SplitN calls to use Cut as much as possible).

--- Comment #16 by rsc ---
These statistics do make a good case. Thank you for taking the time to gather them.

strings.TrimmedPrefix is a bit too long a name. Given that we have strings.Cut that returns a 'found' boolean already, which is what we want to add here, maybe strings.CutPrefix and strings.CutSuffix?



--- Comment #17 by rsc ---
Retitled, and will move to likely accept.


--- Comment #18 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #19 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group

--- Content after FINAL acceptance decision removed ---