=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU3OTExODMyMjM= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/43823

==== [Issue Title] ====
time: support Decimal Comma for fractional seconds

==== [Issue Body] ====
### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
$ go version
go version go1.15.3 darwin/amd64
</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?

Yes, I can reproduce it on the playground

### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?

<pre>
GOARCH=amd64
GOOS=darwin
</pre>

<details><summary><code>go env</code> Output</summary><br><pre>
$ go env
GOARCH="amd64"
GOOS="darwin"
...
</pre></details>

### What did you do?

Attempt to parse a date/time string containing milliseconds preceded by a decimal comma. Example:
https://play.golang.org/p/wxEOUEVvgaV

### What did you expect to see?

`Time is 02/12/2019 15:45:48,746`

### What did you see instead?

`parsing time "02/12/2019 15:45:48,746" as "02/01/2006 15:04:05,000": cannot parse "746" as ",000"`

### Additional Context

[ISO_8601](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601#cite_note-26) states that decimal comma is a supported, even preferred, value for the separator between seconds and fractional seconds.

Related Issues:
- #6189 
- #27746
- #26002
- #36145 
- #43813 

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by rsc ---
The proposal here is to accept 05,000 as the same as 05.000 in a time format (and similarly for other numbers of zeros). 
Presumably dot would continue to only match dot, and comma would only match comma.
Do I have that right?




--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
/cc @robpike 

--- Comment #3 by djaglowski ---
@rsc That's correct.

--- Comment #4 by robpike ---
Seems reasonable on its own, although I am wary of what might follow. Internationalization was never the goal of this package.


--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
It's definitely not a goal to do full internationalization, but ISO-8601 does recognize , as a decimal fraction separator, so at least we are following a defined standard for times. And it does not have any other internationalization-related changes, so that's a clear line we can refer to if people want other changes.

In particular, I don't think this opens us to internationalized month and day names. Those will stay just the English set.


--- Comment #6 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #7 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group

--- Content after FINAL acceptance decision removed ---