=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU3OTczNDAxODc= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/44006

==== [Issue Title] ====
syscall/js: remove Wrapper type to avoid extreme allocations and improve performance

==== [Issue Body] ====
### Introduction

It is truly remarkable what can be accomplished by compiling Go to WebAssembly (`wasm`), but virtually all such applications are being held back by the combination of two factors:

1. Every function call to JS that passes arguments makes multiple, unavoidable Go heap allocations
2. The Go garbage collector then blocks the main, and only, thread for a large fraction of a second

As the title of this proposal suggests, the performance problems can be solved if the `js.Wrapper` type is removed. Removal of existing features from the standard library should not be taken lightly, but this particular removal is both allowable (`syscall/js` is exempt from Go's compatibility promise) and necessary given the data.

### Why `Wrapper` matters

At the core of every call to JS, `syscall/js` uses its `ValueOf` function to convert Go arguments to their JS equivalents. This conversion is implemented as a switch statement:
```go
func ValueOf(x interface{}) Value {
	switch x := x.(type) { // some cases omitted
	case Value:
		return x
	case Wrapper:
		return x.JSValue() // the problem
	case nil:
		return valueNull
	case bool:
		if x {
			return valueTrue
		} else {
			return valueFalse
		}
	case int:
		return floatValue(float64(x))
	case unsafe.Pointer:
		return floatValue(float64(uintptr(x)))
	case float64:
		return floatValue(x)
	case string:
		return makeValue(stringVal(x))
	default:
		panic("ValueOf: invalid value")
	}
}
```
One of the cases is the `Wrapper` interface. This was intended to allow any type implementing the `JSValue` method to be easily passed as an argument to a JS method. However, as `JSValue` may consist of an arbitrary pointer receiver, the compiler must assume the worst:
```go
type BadWrapper struct {
    Value js.Value
}

var escapeRoute *BadWrapper

// Implements js.Wrapper
func (this *BadWrapper) JSValue() js.Value {
    escapeRoute = this // escape to heap
    return this.Value
}
```
This means that the argument to `ValueOf`, which includes any argument passed to any JS function, is guaranteed to escape to the heap.

### Data

Data is reported as number of heap allocations per unit of work.

| Optimizations (cumulative) | Frame of game (best case) | Frame of game (worst case) | Typical canvas/WebGL call | `[]byte` copy to JS | `string` manipulation | Garbage collector effect on gameplay |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| Control (no optimizations) | 858 | 40000 | 3 | 1 | 3 | Frequent stutters |
| `//go:noescape` | 829 | untested | 3 | 0 | 3 | Frequent stutters |
| `makeArgs` slices on stack (See #39740) | 383 | untested | 1 | 0 | 3 | Less-frequent stutters |
| Unexport `Wrapper.JSValue()` | 383 | untested | 1 | 0 | 3 | No change |
| Remove `Wrapper` type | 62* | 300* | 0 | 0 | 2 | Not bad, especially after other allocations are reduced |

*on the order of the number of allocations that happen unrelated to `syscall/js`

#### Data collection method
1. Debug output from my online game, implemented in Go
2. Micro-benchmarks: [main.go](https://github.com/golang/go/files/5897400/main.go.txt)
3. Entire patch to `syscall/js/js.go`: [js.go.patch](https://github.com/golang/go/files/5897407/js.go.patch.txt)

### Context

Preliminary discussion of this proposal has has already taken place in #39740. The consensus there was that removing `Wrapper` is the only way to sustainably call JS functions in a performance-critical setting. Given that `syscall/js` is a low level package, it make sense to prioritize performance over the ease of use afforded by `Wrapper`.

#### More context on my actual use case
1. My game's client is written in `Go`, compiled to `WebAssembly`, uses `WebGL 2.0` APIs, and is intended to run at 60 frames per second.
2. The WebGL API requires many function calls, each mainly taking integer and floating point parameters.
3. I have observed to Go garbage collector running every 3-5 seconds under normal circumstances.
3. I have observed the Go garbage collector running over 10 times in a single frame in a worst-case-scenario
4. I have observed the Go garbage collector taking 300+ milliseconds to run

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by hajimehoshi ---
CC @neelance @agnivade 

--- Comment #2 by neelance ---
I support this proposal. The Wrapper type was only added for convenience and performance trumps convenience for such a low-level package as `syscall/js`.

The author of the Wrapper type also supports the removal: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/39740#issuecomment-767542377

@rsc Please consider this proposal for the proposal process.

--- Comment #3 by awfulcooking ---
> It is truly remarkable what can be accomplished by compiling Go to WebAssembly

I have a program which animates an LED matrix, and transfers frames @ 60fps, to a JS IDE for rendering.

Receiving binary frames over a WebSocket, the IDE starts to stutter around 9000 - 10,000 pixels.

Receiving binary frames from embedded Go to JS, the server both rendering the animation and copying the bytes to a JS buffer within the context of a [requestAnimationFrame](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/window/requestAnimationFrame), the IDE can handle 10,000 pixels like butter.. without breaking a sweat!

Reading this proposal, and hearing of performance improvements in 1.17, gives hope that even better performance is possible!

Exciting times for the web platform and Go both.

--- Comment #4 by neelance ---
Any chance to get this into the proposal process this cycle? 🙂 

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
Do we have any numbers about how often Wrapper is used today? Did I miss them above?


--- Comment #6 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #7 by finnbear ---
> Do we have any numbers about how often Wrapper is used today? Did I miss them above?

You didn't miss anything; the original proposal didn't make an effort to enumerate usage of `js.Wrapper`, but it probably should have.

Anyway, searching https://github.com/search?q=%22js.Wrapper%22+language%3AGo&type=Code returns 375 code results.
- For comparison, the close alternative of `js.Value` returns 2,790 results and `syscall/js` returns 16,253 results. Based on these numbers alone, approximately 2-13% of the open-source Go `syscall/js` ecosystem is affected. I attribute this low percentage to the fact that it is easy to develop applications without `js.Wrapper` (as an `interface`, it is mainly a convenience for library developers).
- The vast majority of the `js.Wrapper` results are false positives (i.e. from projects that use JS and "wrappers," but not syscall/js). Many of the code results are in comments, so the actual usage of the `js.Wrapper` type is less. I made no attempt to check what fraction of the `js.Value` results are false positives, since there are too many.

Here is a (potentially incomplete) list of projects that would (at least temporarily) break (they reference the `js.Wrapper` type). The list starts with what seemed to be "the big ones" and then proceeds in no particular order. Of these projects, some rely on `js.Wrapper` simply to call `.JSValue()` themselves, instead of actually passing to `Call`, `New`, or `Invoke` (which could be adapted to passing around `js.Value` instead).

- https://github.com/dennwc/dom
- https://github.com/nobonobo/three
- https://github.com/atdiar/particleui
- https://github.com/crhntr/window
- https://github.com/OneOfOne/wjsu
- https://github.com/yisar/labor
- https://github.com/mgnsk/go-wasm-demos
- https://github.com/supergeoff/wasm-bindings-chartjs
- https://github.com/GontikR99/chutzparse
- https://github.com/volut-staging/0x-mesh
- https://github.com/teamortix/golang-wasm
- https://github.com/dairaga/srx
- https://github.com/batzz-00/gamer-hq
- https://github.com/nlepage/go-wasm-http-server
- https://github.com/jangocheng/data-platform
- https://github.com/c4dt/go-wasm
- https://github.com/nobonobo/wecty
- https://github.com/ghthor/filu

It would be interesting to get the perspectives of the maintainers of these projects.

Finally, since it's been 8 months since this proposal began, I have more context on my particular use cases: Development of the Go version of my online game has stopped, and development on a Rust port has started (but stalled). I also started developing a new online Game based on Rust wasm. Rust seems to be a better fit for performance critical wasm. While I would not personally benefit from this proposal any more, I think it would help close the Go<->Rust wasm gap by eliminating the major performance cliff.

--- Comment #8 by hajimehoshi ---
> Anyway, searching https://github.com/search?q=%22js.Wrapper%22+language%3AGo&type=Code returns 375 code results.

https://github.com/search?q=%22syscall%2Fjs%22+%22js.Wrapper%22+language%3AGo&type=Code I searched this with `syscall/js` and the number of results was 55.

As this is an interface, we should find the code that defines a method `JSValue() js.Value`, as you have already mentioned.

--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
It sounds like we need more data about the potential impact here.


--- Comment #10 by rsc ---
I would still feel better with more data, but because this is in syscall and in wasm, which is not heavily used, and because literally _no one_ has objected to doing this, it seems okay to do it and see if anyone comes forward.


--- Comment #11 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #12 by cherrymui ---
This is not really about removing Wrapper type, which I have no objection. But I don't really understand the escaping part. What exactly escapes, and can be avoided if Wrapper is removed? And if a value is passed to JavaScript how do we know it is safe to not escape? I.e. be sure that JavaScript doesn't hold the value or use it in some asynchronous way? Thanks.

--- Comment #13 by finnbear ---
>What exactly escapes

From Go's perspective, the parameter `x` to `ValueOf` escapes because its data potion can escape. All `interface`s in Go operate via indirection. They have [one pointer to type information and one pointer to data](https://github.com/golang/go/blob/bf86aec25972f3a100c3aa58a6abcbcc35bdea49/src/runtime/runtime2.go#L143-L146). The `interface` itself may be copied by value, but that data must live on the stack or heap. If there is any chance the `interface` or it's data could escape off the stack, the Go compiler must ensure that the `interface`'s data lives on the heap (by allocating the data that goes into the interface on the heap, e.g. when an argument is passed to a function that takes an `interface` parameter).

> and can be avoided if Wrapper is removed?

As outlined in my original proposal, the `case Wrapper` is the deciding factor for whether the interface's data can escape. Because `Wrapper` is, in itself, an `interface`, its dynamically-dispatched `JSValue` receiver can run arbitrary code using the interface's data, which may be a pointer (including storing that pointer globally or on the heap, but crucially, off the stack; see `BadWrapper`). For all other cases in the switch statement, the conversion to JS is statically dispatched so the Go compiler knows that nothing escapes.

> And if a value is passed to JavaScript how do we know it is safe to not escape? I.e. be sure that JavaScript doesn't hold the value or use it in some asynchronous way?

It is `unsafe` for JS to hold pointers into Go's memory, because if Go allocates memory, it may need to expand its WebAssembly linear memory array buffer. At that point, JS would hold stale pointers. I assume it was for this reason that whoever designed `syscall/js` made it copy all values to JS. For example, when you pass a `string` to a JS function, the `string` is copied to JS, and becomes a new JS allocation that is independent from the Go `string`. Anyway, at least in my understanding, this design decision means that Go values will not escape to the Go or JS heap *due to being passed to JS*. But they could easily escape with a `BadWrapper`.

Disclaimer: This is all just my understanding, gathered by optimizing Go and `syscall/js` code. I'm not a Go compiler developer. Feel free to correct me if I said anything wrong or misleading!


--- Comment #14 by cherrymui ---
Thanks. Yeah, I think it makes sense and is safe for ValueOf not escape the interface data at least in some cases (e.g. numbers).


--- Comment #15 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group

--- Content after FINAL acceptance decision removed ---