=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU4NjEwNTIyNjc= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/45628

==== [Issue Title] ====
encoding/xml: add Decoder.InputPos

==== [Issue Body] ====
<!--
Please answer these questions before submitting your issue. Thanks!
For questions please use one of our forums: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/Questions
-->

### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
$ go version
go version go1.16 darwin/amd64
</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?


### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?

<details><summary><code>go env</code> Output</summary><br><pre>
$ go env
GO111MODULE=""
GOARCH="amd64"
GOBIN=""
GOCACHE="/var/folders/md/l2nnr5490tq114003qtxfnk40000gn/T//gocache"
GOENV="/Users/patrick/Library/Application Support/go/env"
GOEXE=""
GOFLAGS=""
GOHOSTARCH="amd64"
GOHOSTOS="darwin"
GOINSECURE=""
GOMODCACHE="/Users/patrick/go/pkg/mod"
GONOPROXY=""
GONOSUMDB=""
GOOS="darwin"
GOPATH="/Users/patrick/go"
GOPRIVATE=""
GOPROXY="https://proxy.golang.org,direct"
GOROOT="/usr/local/Cellar/go/1.16/libexec"
GOSUMDB="sum.golang.org"
GOTMPDIR=""
GOTOOLDIR="/usr/local/Cellar/go/1.16/libexec/pkg/tool/darwin_amd64"
GOVCS=""
GOVERSION="go1.16"
GCCGO="gccgo"
AR="ar"
CC="clang"
CXX="clang++"
CGO_ENABLED="1"
GOMOD="/Users/patrick/prog/go/xml/xmltolua/go.mod"
CGO_CFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_CPPFLAGS=""
CGO_CXXFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_FFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_LDFLAGS="-g -O2"
PKG_CONFIG="pkg-config"
GOGCCFLAGS="-fPIC -arch x86_64 -m64 -pthread -fno-caret-diagnostics -Qunused-arguments -fmessage-length=0 -fdebug-prefix-map=/var/folders/md/l2nnr5490tq114003qtxfnk40000gn/T/go-build1589123002=/tmp/go-build -gno-record-gcc-switches -fno-common"
</pre></details>

### What did you do?

I use the package `encoding/xml` for a programming language similar to XSLT. Now I'd like to provide user feedback if something is semantically wrong with the input. For example when the user has forgotten to initialise a variable. In that case the XML syntax is correct.

I want to tell the user "you have a problem in line xyz" but I cannot get the current line from the XML decoder. Thus I propose to add a function to the XML package similar to `func (d *Decoder) InputOffset() int64 { return d.offset }`:

```go
// InputLine retuns the line of the current decoder position.
// The line gives the location of the end of the most recently returned token.
func (d *Decoder) InputLine() int {
	return d.line
}
```

where a test case would be something like this:

```go
func TestInputLineNum(t *testing.T) {
	testInput := "<P>Fo\no<P>\n<P>Bar</P>\n"
	linenumbers := []int{1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3, 3, 4}
	d := NewDecoder(strings.NewReader(testInput))
	var err error
	for c := 0; c < len(linenumbers); c++ {
		_, err = d.Token()
		if err != nil {
			t.Errorf("expected no error on d.Token()")
		}
		if have, want := d.InputLine(), linenumbers[c]; have != want {
			t.Errorf("d.InputLine() = %d, want %d (c = %d)", have, want, c)
		}
	}
}
```

I'd be happy to provide a pull request, but since this function is so trivial, I just post it here as well.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by seankhliao ---
duplicate of #43589 ?

--- Comment #2 by pgundlach ---
@seankhliao my bad. I think I should close this and create a pull request for #43589?

--- Comment #3 by seankhliao ---
considering this is new API and similar to a recent change to encoding/csv, lets put this through the [poposal](https://golang.org/s/proposal) process

I'll close the other one as this one is more fleshed out.

cc @rsc via [OWNERS](https://golang.org/s/owners)

--- Comment #4 by pgundlach ---
I have added the code to Gerrit at https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/go/+/311270

--- Comment #5 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/311270 mentions this issue: `encoding/xml: expose decoder line number`

--- Comment #6 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
Over on #44221, we started with line number but ended up returning (line, column int) where column is 1-based and counts bytes (not runes). It seems like probably the same thing would be worthwhile here? So should the method be

    (*Decoder) InputPos() (line, column int)

?


--- Comment #8 by pgundlach ---
That makes more sense than just returning the line. Good point. 

--- Comment #9 by pgundlach ---
@rsc  Not sure if I can come up with a decent implementation for the column value though. I could increase a column counter every time a byte is read and set it to 0 when `\n` is encountered, but that does not work at (d *Decoder) ungetc() when a `\n` is unread. 

Otherwise one could read backwards when calling the new function `InputPos` until the beginning of a line is found, but I am uncertain how to deal with reading backwards on an `io.ByteReader`.


--- Comment #10 by ianlancetaylor ---
Perhaps you can record the byte offset of the start of the line (using the `Decoder.offset` field) and then compute the column number by subtracting that from the current offset.

--- Comment #11 by pgundlach ---
I mistakenly assumed that `ungetc()` can unget more than one byte and is not immediately followed by `getc()`. So the implementation is rather simple.

I have updated the code on Gerrit.


--- Comment #12 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #13 by dsnet ---
FWIW, I was against adding line-tracking logic to `encoding/json` on the basis that it would non-trivially slow down the common case. See https://github.com/golang/go/issues/43513#issuecomment-755754498.

I don't think #44221 can serve as existing precedence for why this should be added. The CSV format fundamentally requires tracking where the new lines occur since newlines are the delimiter between records. In contrast, neither JSON nor XML have grammars where newlines have semantic significance beyond any other whitespace characters.

--- Comment #14 by pgundlach ---
@dsnet The line numbering is already there. So the only addition is the simple counting of the offset which is IMO a very trivial (in the sense of computation complexity / computation time) operation. 

While you are surely correct that the line number is not inherently used for grammar purposes, it is very helpful to give feedback to the user application in the case of an error. And this does not necessarily have to be a syntax error.

(edit:)

I also don't think that #44221 is the _reason_ to add the InputPos. It merely suggests a function signature to be used for the reason of symmetry. 


--- Comment #15 by dsnet ---
> The line numbering is already there.

@pgundlach, you are correct. It seems that line information already leaks into the API through the `SyntaxError.Line` field. In other words, the `xml` package has already committed to taking on the computational cost of counting lines.

> it is very helpful to give feedback to the user application in the case of an error. And this does not necessarily have to be a syntax error.

Line information is useful, but performance is also a good goal. Regardless, the performance ship has already sailed as you pointed out. So my argument no longer has basis in the context of `xml`.

--- Comment #16 by pgundlach ---
@dsnet  Of course it will add some operations to the overall process, but when I read "the performance ship has already sailed" I get the impression that you want to say that line counting will *dramatically* slow down the processing. My (quick and not representative) benchmarks show me rather similar results with and without line counting and with column counting added in.


```
goos: darwin
goarch: amd64
pkg: xml
cpu: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-5557U CPU @ 3.10GHz
current state: with line number counting
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1258	    957099 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1117	    996439 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1162	    979260 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1153	   1029538 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1138	    997193 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op

without line number counting
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1285	    935848 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1178	    988658 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1136	    970551 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1213	    966737 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1254	    952503 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1266	    980071 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1198	    930091 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1252	    922722 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1203	    928346 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op

with line number and offset counter
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1254	    947150 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1198	    945277 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1117	   1011851 ns/op	  112705 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1234	    949347 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1198	   1043049 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
BenchmarkLineno-4   	    1152	   1004838 ns/op	  112704 B/op	    3119 allocs/op
```

All numbers are within a range where I can't tell if the difference is due to the algorithm or due to some other things happening on my computer right now.  It would need better benchmarks to see how much time these things add to XML parsing. 

Wich is what I' expect because 

```go
	if b == '\n' {
		d.line++
	}
```

is absolutely negligible in terms of computation time compared to the rest of the code.

 

--- Comment #17 by dsnet ---
The existing parsers in both the `xml` and `json` packages are fairly slow. Thus, adding `if b == '\n' { d.line++ }` **today** is a negligible cost. In the case of JSON, when I heavily optimized the parser to be an order of magnitude faster, the line counting logic imposed a non-trivial performance cost (5-15% if I recall).

--- Comment #18 by pgundlach ---
@dsnet ok, fair enough, good point.

--- Comment #19 by rsc ---
I'm skeptical that the counting fundamentally can't be done efficiently even in a faster JSON. But that's not the issue today.


--- Comment #20 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group

--- Content after FINAL acceptance decision removed ---