=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU5MjE3MjE0ODU= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/46771

==== [Issue Title] ====
mime/multipart: add FileContentDisposition

==== [Issue Body] ====
For uploading files as part of multipart/form-data requests, the specification allows the content type to be specified, e.g. application/pdf. However, the current version of Go always uses application/octet-stream. While it's possible to work around this, it requires duplicating code like the `Sprintf` command and the escaping. An example can be found at for example, see https://github.com/Ingenico-ePayments/connect-sdk-go/blob/master/defaultimpl/DefaultConnection.go#L345. Lines 345-348 could all be replaced by a single line if the Go API supported custom content types, and the escaping of quotes could be removed completely.

I've already created a PR for this which: https://github.com/golang/go/pull/29140. It's fully backward compatible because it introduces a new function; the existing function delegates to the new one.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
For the record, the new API proposed in https://golang.org/cl/153178 is

```Go
// CreateFormFileWithContentType is a convenience wrapper around CreatePart.
// It creates a new form-data header with the provided field name, file name and content type.
func (w *Writer) CreateFormFileWithContentType(fieldname, filename, contentType string) (io.Writer, error)
```

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
What if instead we add:
```
func FileContentDisposition(fieldname, filename string) string {
    return fmt.Sprintf(`form-data; name="%s"; filename="%s"`,
        escapeQuotes(fieldname), escapeQuotes(filename)))
}
```
?

Then CreateFormFile is very simple:

```
func (w *Writer) CreateFormFile(fieldname, filename string) (io.Writer, error) {
        h := make(textproto.MIMEHeader)
        h.Set("Content-Disposition", FileContentDisposition(fieldname, filename)
        h.Set("Content-Type", "application/octet-stream")
        return w.CreatePart(h)
}
```

and at that point if you want a custom Content-Type or any other header, it's reasonable to just write your own version.


--- Comment #3 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #4 by robtimus ---
The latter would work, but it still would require 4 lines of code (excluding any function declaration) just to use a different content type. And I think that form files mostly come in just one variant - what the existing `CreateFormFile` produces, but with often different content types. And that's where `CreateFormFileWithContentType` comes in.

With your proposal, for most file uploads you'd make developers write this:
```
h := make(textproto.MIMEHeader)
h.Set("Content-Disposition", FileContentDisposition(fieldname, filename)
h.Set("Content-Type", "application/pdf")
writer, error := w.CreatePart(h)
// error check omitted
// now write to writer
```
instead of this:
```
writer, error := CreateFormFileWithContentType(fieldname, filename, "application/pdf")
```

Perhaps `FileContentDisposition` is a good addition for those developers that need to add more headers like perhaps a content encoding (base64). Personally, I'd add both functions.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
This is an unusual enough case that it's OK to have to write 4 lines. The important part is not having to copy-paste the complex Sprintf. Retitled to be about the FileContentDisposition function.


--- Comment #6 by robtimus ---
I have to disagree with you that a content type that is not `application/octet-stream` is an unusual case. Several services verify the provided content type first as a shortcut; only if it's valid (e.g. an image or PDF) is the actual content inspected.

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
I only said it was OK to write 4 lines for that case. The part that is bad to copy-paste is the Sprintf call, hence the function.


--- Comment #8 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #9 by neild ---
Copying a possible alternative from #49329:

```
// NewFormFieldHeader creates a form-data header with the provided field name.
func NewFormFieldHeader(fieldname) textproto.MIMEHeader {
  h := make(textproto.MIMEHeader)
  h.Set("Content-Disposition", fmt.Sprintf(`form-data; name="%s"`, escapeQuotes(fieldname)))
  return h
}

// NewFormFileHeader creates a form-data header with the provided field and file names.
func NewFormFileHeader(fieldname, filename string) textproto.MIMEHeader {
  h := make(textproto.MIMEHeader)
  h.Set("Content-Disposition", fmt.Sprintf(`form-data; name="%s"; filename="%s"`, escapeQuotes(fieldname), escapeQuotes(filename)))
  return h
}
```

This pushes the header name (in addition to the value) into the `multipart` package API.

--- Comment #10 by rsc ---
As soon as there's a second field to write a helper for, having helpers that make the map is not going to scale. It seems like we should probably stick with the field-specific helper.


--- Comment #11 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group

--- Content after FINAL acceptance decision removed ---