=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU5MzgwOTA0MTE= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/47066

==== [Issue Title] ====
reflect: permit Value.Bytes (but not SetBytes) on addressable byte arrays

==== [Issue Body] ====
I'm trying to get a []byte of an array via reflect, without allocations.

reflect.Value.Bytes [says](https://golang.org/pkg/reflect/#Value.Bytes):

> Bytes returns v's underlying value. It panics if v's underlying value is not a slice of bytes.

I have an array, not a slice. I can slice it, but reflect.Value.Slice call allocates:

```
func TestArraySliceAllocs(t *testing.T) {
        type T struct {
                X [32]byte
        }
        x := &T{X: [32]byte{1: 1, 2: 2, 3: 3, 4: 4}}

        var b []byte
        n := int(testing.AllocsPerRun(2000, func() {
                v := reflect.ValueOf(x)
                b = v.Elem().Field(0).Slice(0, 5).Bytes()
        }))
        if n != 0 {
                t.Errorf("allocs = %d; want 0", n)
        }
        const want = "\x00\x01\x02\x03\x04"
        if string(b) != want {
                t.Errorf("got %q; want %q", b, want)
        }
}
```

(fails with 1 alloc, from Slice)

Perhaps reflect.Value.Bytes could also permit getting a `[]byte` of an array of bytes?

Or maybe I'm holding reflect wrong and there's an alloc-free way to do this already.

/cc @josharian 

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by randall77 ---
If you have a _pointer_ to an array of bytes in a `reflect.Value`, you could do

p := v.Interface().(*[8]byte)[:]

(assuming you know `8`)

In your code, that's `b = v.Elem().Field(0).Addr().Interface().(*[32]byte)[:]`

--- Comment #2 by bradfitz ---
I don't know the length, though. I want to do this in a package that can run over anybody's types at runtime.


--- Comment #3 by randall77 ---
I see. I think it would be fine to allow `Bytes` to work on an addressable array (or pointer to array?).


--- Comment #4 by josharian ---
Is it possible to make `Slice` not allocate when the array is addressable (or when it is a pointer to an array)?

--- Comment #5 by DeedleFake ---
~~Maybe I'm more tired than I think and I'm completely misreading something here, but doesn't that test code make sure that `Slice()` _doesn't_ allocate? It marks it as an error if `testing.AllocsPerRun()` returns anything other than zero. The error message even explicitly says `allocs = %d; want 0`.~~

Edit: I'm definitely more tired than I think. Somehow completely missed the

> (fails with 1 alloc, from Slice)

underneath.

I read through both `reflect.Value.Slice()` and `reflect.Value.Bytes()`. I think special-casing `Bytes()` to allow calling it with an array makes sense. I'd prefer being able to get rid of the allocation in `Slice()`, but I'm not sure that that's particularly feasible without changing the structure of `reflect.Value`. Am I correct that the allocation happens because `reflect.Value` can only hold at most a word of data, so it stores a pointer to the newly created slice header instead, which causes it to escape to the heap on line 1810? `-gcflags='-m'` doesn't seem to do anything about stdlib packages, even if I combine it with `-a`.

It should also probably be noted that this is pretty easy to workaround, especially in Go 1.17:

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"reflect"
	"testing"
	"unsafe"
)

func main() {
	v := reflect.ValueOf(&[...]byte{3, 5, 7}).Elem()
	var s []byte
	n := testing.AllocsPerRun(1024, func() {
		s = unsafe.Slice((*byte)(unsafe.Pointer(v.Addr().Pointer())), v.Len())
	})
	fmt.Println(n)
}
```

--- Comment #6 by dsnet ---
I like @randall77's suggestion of allow `Bytes` on an addressable array or non-nil pointer to array.

In some code, I have:
```go
if t.Kind() == reflect.Array {
	b = va.Slice(0, t.Len()).Bytes()
} else {
	b = va.Bytes()
}
```

I would like to reduce it to simply:
```go
b = va.Bytes()
```

and avoid the allocation that occurs in `Slice`.

--- Comment #7 by dsnet ---
Analyzing the module proxy, I found:
* 655 cases of `x.Slice(...).Bytes()`
* 648 cases of `x.Slice(0, ...).Bytes()` (98.9% of total)
* 276 cases of `x.Slice(0, x.Len()).Bytes()` (42.1% of total)

Of the 372 cases of `x.Slice(0, ...).Bytes()` that aren't `x.Slice(0, x.Len()).Bytes()`, many were like `x.Slice(0, n).Bytes()`, where `n` was the length of the array, but obtained elsewhere to avoid repeatedly calling `reflect.Value.Len`.

--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
Making v.Bytes() work when v is an addressable byte array seems OK.
Or can we optimize away the slice conversion in v.Slice().Bytes()?



--- Comment #9 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #10 by randall77 ---
Optimizing the allocation out of `v.Slice()` sounds hard. The tricky part is to keep track of the args to `Slice` somewhere.
We could conceivably introduce another flag to `reflect.Value.flag` which means "this is a slice of a ptr to an array with slice bounds 0 and len(v.Type.Elem())", and set that flag when we're slicing a pointer-to-array with the right `Slice` args. Then everywhere that accepts a slice type needs a special case to recognize this flag.

All to avoid just letting `Bytes` work on addressable arrays, that seems overkill.


--- Comment #11 by dsnet ---
> We could conceivably introduce another flag to reflect.Value.flag which means "this is a slice of a ptr to an array with slice bounds 0 and len(v.Type.Elem())"

This would unfortunately still not help the common patterns where `reflect.Value.Slice` and `reflect.Append` (#48000) always allocate.

--- Comment #12 by dsnet ---
> Making v.Bytes() work when v is an addressable byte array seems OK.

In addition, we should probably update `Value.SetBytes` should stay consistent with `Value.Bytes`.

--- Comment #13 by rsc ---
SetBytes seems more difficult. 
What happens if you v.SetBytes(x) and v.Len() and len(x) are different sizes?


--- Comment #14 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/357331 mentions this issue: `reflect: allow Value.Bytes and Value.SetBytes on byte arrays`

--- Comment #15 by dsnet ---
I mailed out https://golang.org/cl/357331 as a prototype.

> What happens if you v.SetBytes(x) and v.Len() and len(x) are different sizes?

I would expect it to panic. The `Bytes` method already makes implicit assumptions about the length of the `[]byte` that it returns for an array. It seems reasonable for `SetBytes` to have expectations on the length it accepts.

--- Comment #16 by randall77 ---
That `SetBytes` behavior is subtly different though. `SetBytes` on a `[]byte` just replaces pointers, it does no copying. Whereas `SetBytes` on an array does a copy of the underlying data.

Unlike `Bytes`, where the returned `[]byte` is always aliased to the storage for the input slice or array.

Would it make more sense for `SetBytes` on an addressable `*[N]byte` to just update the pointer to point to the first `N` bytes of the input byte slice?

That means you couldn't `SetBytes` on an addressable `[N]byte`. You would use `Copy` for that (which is the behavior your prototype does, I think).


--- Comment #17 by rsc ---
That is in fact subtle, @randall77. 
It makes me think we should leave SetBytes as is, maybe?
It looks like today SetBytes requires a slice.
It seems safest to just keep it that way.


--- Comment #18 by randall77 ---
Agreed. If you really want the alias behavior, you can use `Set`, and if you really want the copy behavior, you can use `Copy`.
```
var a *[4]byte = ...
var b *[4]byte = ...

// copy b to a
va := reflect.ValueOf(a)
vb := reflect.ValueOf(b)
reflect.Copy(va.Elem(), vb.Elem())

// alias b to a
va := reflect.ValueOf(a)
vb := reflect.ValueOf(&b).Elem()
vb.Set(va)
```
Unlike with `[]byte`, array pointers can be put in interfaces (and `reflect.Value`s) without allocation, so having a separate `Set` function is less useful.


--- Comment #19 by dsnet ---
@randall77 Good point about subtly different behavior for `[]byte` with regard to `SetBytes`.

It feels weird that `Bytes` and `SetBytes` are asymmetrical, but maybe that's a necessity.

--- Comment #20 by rsc ---
Indeed - reading and writing are asymmetrical.


--- Comment #21 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #22 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group

--- Content after FINAL acceptance decision removed ---