=== Fetching Proposal: I_kwDOAWBuf85MIdpx ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/53466

==== [Issue Title] ====
all: add freebsd/riscv64 port

==== [Issue Body] ====
This issue is intended to serve both as a proposal and to track the progress of adding the freebsd/riscv64 port.

The majority of porting work is done, there's an out-of-tree port at https://github.com/MikaelUrankar/go/tree/freebsd_riscv64 which builds and passes all `run.bash` tests, including cgo (tested under QEMU and on Unmatched).

@mengzhuo has graciously agreed to setup and maintain the freebsd/riscv64 builder (on SiFive Unmatched) and @MikaelUrankar has agreed to be the port maintainer.

cc @golang/freebsd @golang/riscv64 @mengzhuo @MikaelUrankar

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by mengzhuo ---
CC @rsc 

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #3 by mengzhuo ---
I tried to install the prometheus node_exporter and got undefined errors from `golang.org/x/sys`

I think we should update golang.org/x/sys and other x/ moduels first and leave alone the Go main develope cycle.

--- Comment #4 by paulzhol ---
I'm already updating `golang.org/x/sys` as part of https://github.com/golang/go/issues/53280. It is indeed horribly out of date. For example `Time_t` on freebsd/arm is still 32-bit. It was [switched](https://cgit.freebsd.org/src/commit/?id=ef4d5877ddefe6bfa5943d8e16f17c0c64fa7d17&h=stable%2F12) to 64-bit more than 16 years ago (I guess it originates directly from the `syscall` package).
There ptrace constants which are defined only on the x86 arches, not available on both ARMs (because these were probably not generated on actual hosts).
I shudder to think of what state the `golang.org/x/net/route` is in. `std` still carries a hand copied `if_data8` and `if_msghdr8` types.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
The new port policy (#53383) will require two maintainers for the port. Assuming that is accepted, is there anyone else who would be willing to be a second maintainer for freebsd/riscv64?


--- Comment #6 by dmgk ---
Assuming nobody else volunteers, I'll be willing to be a second maintainer for the freebsd/riscv64 (can we have more than two?). I think more people will be interested when this port is closer to be merged.

--- Comment #7 by mengzhuo ---
I want to be the third maintainer since the freebsd/riscv64 stage0 is up and ready.

--- Comment #8 by gopherbot ---
Change https://go.dev/cl/416834 mentions this issue: `unix: add freebsd/riscv64 support`

--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
Thanks to @MikaelUrankar, @dmgk, and @mengzhuo for volunteering to be maintainers.

--- Comment #10 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #11 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group

--- Content after FINAL acceptance decision removed ---