=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU2NjQwODgyMzU= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/40357

==== [Issue Title] ====
cmd/go: deprecate a major module version

==== [Issue Body] ====
# Proposal: A Mechanism For Deprecating Modules

Authors: @peterbourgon, @adg

This proposal is a replacement for part of #38762. The other part is replaced by #40323.

## Problem

Currently, there is no standard way for package authors to signal to consumers that a major version of a package is deprecated and no longer supported. Package consumers can easily inadvertently select an unmaintained major version (see #40323) and miss important new features or bug fixes. 

## Proposal

We propose adding a `Deprecated:` comment for modules that is recognized by go tooling to flag that a module version as deprecated. This is parallel to the `Deprecated:` comments that can be used to flag a package or identifier as deprecated.

When selecting a deprecated module version, the go tool will print a note to the user alerting them to the deprecation, and printing the deprecation text provided by the module author. Authors can use this notification to direct package consumers to more recent major versions, or an entirely new module that replaces the deprecated one.

As with package-level deprecation comments, module deprecation comments can span multiple lines.

## Example

The author of module `github.com/peterbourgon/ff` has released a new major version `v2` (current version `v2.0.1`), and wants to deprecate the old major version tree `v1` (latest version `v1.7.4`).

In the `v1` branch, they add a module declaration to the `go.mod` file, above the module declaration:

```
// Deprecated: The latest supported version is github.com/peterbourgon/ff/v2.
module github.com/peterbourgon/ff
```

They commit this change and tag it as a new patch release `v1.7.5`.

There are several ways this deprecation message will or will not be displayed to package consumers.

If a consumer is fetching the module at major version `v1` for the first time, the command succeeds but a deprecation warning is printed as part of go get's output:

```
$ go get gthub.com/peterbourgon/ff
go: deprecated: github.com/peterbourgon/ff v1.7.5 👈
go: deprecated: The latest supported version is github.com/peterbourgon/ff/v2. 👈
```

If a consumer is currently using the module at version e.g. `v1.7.4`, no warnings will be printed when that module version is fetched. However, if the consumer tries to upgrade the dependency, they will see the deprecation warning. Notably, the upgrade will still succeed.

```
$ go get -u github.com/peterbourgon/ff
go: github.com/peterbourgon/ff upgrade => v1.7.5
go: deprecated: github.com/peterbourgon/ff v1.7.5 👈
go: deprecated: The latest supported version is github.com/peterbourgon/ff/v2. 👈
```

If a consumer is currently using the module at major version 1 (e.g. `v1.7.4`), and runs a command that lists the latest version available in that major version tree (i.e. `v1.7.5`), the warning is printed.

```
$ go list -m -u all
example.com/my-module
github.com/BurntSushi/toml v0.3.1
github.com/mitchellh/go-wordwrap v1.0.0
github.com/peterbourgon/ff v1.7.4 [v1.7.5]
go: deprecated: github.com/peterbourgon/ff v1.7.5 👈
go: deprecated: The latest supported version is github.com/peterbourgon/ff/v2. 👈
```

## Integrations

### pkg.go.dev

Module deprecation warnings should be prominently displayed on [pkg.go.dev](https://pkg.go.dev/). It is worth exploring the linkification of module paths when displaying module deprecation notices.

### Editor integration

If and when editors upgrade dependencies, these deprecation notices should be surfaced to the user as appropriate.


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by cespare ---
If both #40323 and this proposal were accepted:

* Am I correct that you propose alerts under the same set of operations?
* If a module version were deprecated and there's a newer major module version available, do you propose to print both warnings?

--- Comment #2 by peterbourgon ---
> Am I correct that you propose alerts under the same set of operations?

To the best of my knowledge, yes: when a module consumer first adds a version of a module to their project which meets the respective criteria.

> If a module version were deprecated and there's a newer major module version available, do you propose to print both warnings?

Yes.

--- Comment #3 by bcmills ---
To me, this has the same issue as proposal #40323: a one-time warning when the dependency is added is easy to miss.

Module deprecation seems like a good thing to surface in `gorelease`, `gopls`, and `pkg.go.dev`. `go get` and `go mod tidy` seem far too late in the development cycle, and too ephemeral anyway.

CC @jayconrod @matloob 

--- Comment #4 by peterbourgon ---
> To me, this has the same issue as proposal #40323: a one-time warning when the dependency is added is easy to miss  . . . `go get` and `go mod tidy` seem far too late in the development cycle, and too ephemeral anyway.

I don't really understand these points. When I add a new module dependency to my project, and then run whichever `go` command will cause it to be fetched — either directly in the terminal, or indirectly through my editor integration — I always watch to see the results of the fetch. Don't you? And isn't that moment, when your project first gains knowledge of a new dependency, _precisely_ the moment when you'd want to be alerted to information like this?

Maybe we have different workflows, that's possible. I'd love to understand yours.

--- Comment #5 by bcmills ---
> When I add a new module dependency to my project, and then run whichever go command will cause it to be fetched — either directly in the terminal, or indirectly through my editor integration — I always watch to see the results of the fetch. Don't you?

If I make a change to a file and then run `go test` on the package containing that file, I generally watch for the results of the test — not for other changes to module versions that happened to precede the actual test run. (To examine the resulting changes to module requirements, I use `git diff` after the code is actually working.)

--- Comment #6 by peterbourgon ---
> If I make a change to a file 

We're not talking about just making a change, we're talking about the first time you add a new dependency to a project, which is much less routine.

> I generally watch for the results of the test — not for other changes to module versions that happened to precede the actual test run.

OK, I think it's clear that the changes in this proposal are likely to be missed by your workflow. I'm not convinced that (a) your workflow is typical, or (b) that in any case this should impact the proposal.

--- Comment #7 by rogpeppe ---
> OK, I think it's clear that the changes in this proposal are likely to be missed by your workflow. I'm not convinced that (a) your workflow is typical, or (b) that in any case this should impact the proposal.

FWIW my workflow is similar. When making changes to a project that might be using new dependencies, the test and/or build output can be verbose and I fear that these warnings would be lost in the noise. The warnings wouldn't be repeated AIUI, so I'm not convinced that this feature is as useful as it could be.

As usual, warnings are often ignored. I think I'd prefer to have a feature that made it an error to add a new direct dependency that's deprecated (either opt-in, or as default behaviour with a way to opt out of it).


--- Comment #8 by myitcv ---
> I always watch to see the results of the fetch. Don't you?

@peterbourgon can you provide more detail on your workflow? 

I ask because from my perspective and experience of using `gopls`, the majority of people will end up adding requirements to their `go.mod` indirectly via `gopls` (largely via the `goimports`-esque workflow). My gut feeling is that the majority of people (based on the assumption that the majority of Go developers today use `gopls`) will not use `go get` directly when it comes to adding/upgrading a dependency.

That's not to say we shouldn't support a notification when invoking `go get`. However I share @bcmills' and @rogpeppe's concerns that this would, in most cases, be a notification that is missed by virtue of it getting buried in other output or because `cmd/go` isn't the end tool being used.

> Module deprecation seems like a good thing to surface in `gorelease`, `gopls`, and `pkg.go.dev`. `go get` and `go mod tidy` seem far too late in the development cycle, and too ephemeral anyway.

Agreed. That said, getting UX for `gopls` "right" so as not to be annoying will be tricky (although we should do something).

cc @stamblerre for `gopls`

--- Comment #9 by zikaeroh ---
> I ask because from my perspective and experience of using `gopls`, the majority of people will end up adding requirements to their `go.mod` indirectly via `gopls` (largely via the `goimports`-esque workflow). My gut feeling is that the majority of people (based on the assumption that the majority of Go developers today use `gopls`) will not use `go get` directly when it comes to adding/upgrading a dependency.

I was quite literally just typing this out! :slightly_smiling_face: 

My workflow when it comes to new libs is to copy out of `pkg.go.dev` or my browser's URL bar directly into my editor, and then `gopls` will eventually make a change to my `go.mod` file by virtue that the tooling manages updates it. Then, I'll go back in the terminal some time later to `go mod tidy` and clean things up. I'm much less often at the terminal running `go get` unless I'm there to explicitly upgrade something or am doing something where I need `go mod edit` or `gohack` or something.

I'll also bring up that I think some users (at least with gopls in VS Code) may be running tests in the editor, be it by running the handy "run tests with coverage" commands or a code lens to run a specific test, in which case they may never see `go test`'s output unless it fails. (I don't fall into this category, except when looking for coverage or debugging a test; I usually run tests in a separate terminal.)

--- Comment #10 by peterbourgon ---
> @peterbourgon can you provide more detail on your workflow?
> 
> I ask because from my perspective and experience of using gopls, the majority of people will end up adding requirements to their go.mod indirectly via gopls (largely via the goimports-esque workflow). My gut feeling is that the majority of people (based on the assumption that the majority of Go developers today use gopls) will not use go get directly when it comes to adding/upgrading a dependency.

Most of the time my workflow is like this, too. I'd say about 30% of the time I manually `go get` a new module in the terminal. In neither case do I ignore or only partially read the output of the next go tool command which ends up actually performing the version resolution and the fetch.

To the broader point, editor integration is important, and I would indeed hope/expect the warning message to be parsed and surfaced in a more visible way in the editor by gopls. I'm not sure if that's a little warning dialog, like when you need to recompile your tools; or a prominent message postfixed to the output pane; or what, exactly. But it seemed like an over-reach for the proposals to dictate how that should work. Once the message is in the output, tooling can surface it however makes sense.

--- Comment #11 by peterbourgon ---
To zoom out a bit, I think we'd be happy to amend the proposal(s) to describe additional places or ways to emit the warning. The mechanisms listed were simply the most obvious to us at time. 

We agree that editor integration and pkg.go.dev are important. I'm not sure about `gorelease` — presumably you meant `goreleaser` — because I want to be notified _before_ I start writing code, not after. But maybe I'm not understanding the idea there.

--- Comment #12 by myitcv ---
Thanks.

> In neither case do I ignore or only partially read the output of the next go tool command which ends up actually performing the version resolution and the fetch.

I suspect you are rather more diligent therefore than most, myself included! If a command succeeds, I don't care much for the output unless that command's principal job is to show me output (e.g. `ls`). Hence I think @rogpeppe is on point with this comment https://github.com/golang/go/issues/40357#issuecomment-662861011, specifically the suggestion in the second paragraph.

If `gopls` performs the addition for you (e.g. accepting a suggestion to add a requirement to `go.mod`) where do you review the output?

> Once the message is in the output, tooling can surface it however makes sense.

I would be surprised if a `gopls` implementation involved parsing the output of a `cmd/go` command (not least because another `cmd/go` invocation, not triggered by `gopls`, might be the one that sees the "edge" and hence the user would miss this in their editor). Rather, as @bcmills alluded to in a reply above, the current set of warnings to show to the user would be determined from the current state of `go.mod`. The tricky part I referred to above is how to track when a user does not action such a notification and instead dismisses it with "I don't care". 

> I'm not sure about `gorelease`

I suspect @bcmills did indeed mean [`gorelease`](https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/exp/cmd/gorelease?tab=doc). i.e. before releasing a new version of a module you would have a final warning that your module (indirectly) depends on a deprecated module. So I think that reference was to a dependency author's workflow.

--- Comment #13 by peterbourgon ---
> I suspect @bcmills did indeed mean gorelease.

Interesting, I've never heard of this tool before. Seems like a kind of release linter? If so I agree that it makes sense to surface there.

> The current set of warnings to show to the user would be determined from the current state of go.mod . . .

I didn't get that from @bcmills comments, but with the point clarified, it seems reasonable to me, too. My intuition is that a dialog generated when the deprecated module is first added to the file would be best, if gopls can edge-trigger on that condition. And/or squiggly-underlining the deprecated modules in the require block of the go.mod at a warning (yellow) level?

--- Comment #14 by Merovius ---
Just a thought: How about adding a `// deprecated` comment to `go.mod`, analogous to `// indirect`? Orthogonal to the question of if and when to output a warning. `go.mod` is where it would pop up in reviews and where I even occasionally check if the set of dependencies looks reasonable to me.

(In the question of "when to show a warning", I kinda agree with everyone here, I feel that when initially adding it would be the semantically correct point in time, but I also would almost certainly miss it if that was the only place. So I don't really have an opinion, but as long as the warning is exposed to me in `go.mod` I wouldn't care either way)

--- Comment #15 by myitcv ---
> Interesting, I've never heard of this tool before

@jayconrod announced it some time ago. We've discussed it a number of times on the [golang-tools](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/golang-tools) calls in various contexts.

> quiggly-underlining the deprecated modules in the require block of the go.mod at a warning (yellow) level?

This is exactly what I was referring to. The challenge comes in storing the state of a dismissed warning. Should that also be dismissed for other authors of the package (c.f. @Merovius's comment) or is that something more personal?

I appreciate this is detail that one might consider beyond the scope of the proposal as it stands, but to my mind in this instance we need to work backwards from the UI/UX of various tools where this detail is surfaced and then derive the scheme of changes to `go.mod` or wherever that most make sense.

--- Comment #16 by peterbourgon ---
> The challenge comes in storing the state of a dismissed warning. Should that also be dismissed for other authors of the package (c.f. @Merovius's comment) or is that something more personal?

In my mind, the dialog on first add is naturally dismiss-able, but the squiggly should be perpetual.

> Just a thought: How about adding a // deprecated comment to go.mod?

Interesting. Where would that logic live? I guess in the go tool?

--- Comment #17 by Merovius ---
> Interesting. Where would that logic live? I guess in the go tool?

I'd assume so - my understanding is, that the best way to programmatically edit `go.mod` is to call into the go tool. I'm not quite sure *which* go tool invocation would add it, probably `go mod tidy` at least and `go get` likely when adding/updating a module line. Personally, I'd be fine with basically any subset that's deemed reasonable.

--- Comment #18 by jayconrod ---
It seems like deprecation notices should be shown in the same situations as retraction notices #24031, namely with `go list -m -u` and `go get` on the relevant module. It seems like the difference is that this proposal suggests showing a deprecation notice only once, the first time the `go.mod` containing the deprecation notice is downloaded into the cache, while retraction notices would be shown every time.

I'd advocate for showing both notices in the same situations: when the user checks for upgrades, and when the user performs an upgrade, regardless of what's in the cache.

(`gorelease`, `pkg.go.dev`, and `gopls` should all show these notices as well, but I think the UX for that can be worked out later.)

--- Comment #19 by peterbourgon ---
@Merovius 

> I'm not quite sure _which_ go tool invocation would add it, probably `go mod tidy` at least and `go get` likely when adding/updating a module line. Personally, I'd be fine with basically any subset that's deemed reasonable.

Perhaps also plain `go {build, install}` if you manually add the requirement, and that's the first go tool invocation which causes the dependency to be fetched?

--- Comment #20 by Merovius ---
@peterbourgon Sure. The only reason I was conservative in my suggestion was that I know it is controversial that `go build` may hit the network or edit `go.mod`. I don't know of a reason not to have the deprecation notice in there, so as far as I'm concerned, any command that edits `go.mod` and has the info should probably add it, if it isn't there :)

--- Comment #21 by adg ---
Thanks everyone for your feedback so far. It has definitely helped me to better understand the various ways in which people manage their module dependencies.

@rogpeppe wrote:

> As usual, warnings are often ignored. I think I'd prefer to have a feature that made it an error to add a new direct dependency that's deprecated (either opt-in, or as default behaviour with a way to opt out of it).

It is possible to make this an error, if the package maintainer wants it to be. They'd do this by breaking the build of (or perhaps retracting?) the package at the version that is deprecated. I think it's desirable that we leave this judgment—of whether it's worth breaking new users—to the upstream package maintainer.

Note that this proposal doesn't *preclude* gopls from doing something useful here. This proposal is about adding a deprecation mechanism for modules that gopls may (and likely will) do something useful with. If we assume that we do want module deprecations, then IMO the first step of incorporating this new feature is to put it in the go tool, and only then broaden the scope to gopls and other tools once we have confidently taken that first step.

@Merovius wrote:

> Just a thought: How about adding a // deprecated comment to go.mod, analogous to // indirect? Orthogonal to the question of if and when to output a warning. go.mod is where it would pop up in reviews and where I even occasionally check if the set of dependencies looks reasonable to me.

I quite like this idea. In my workflow I always scrutinize changes to `go.mod` when I commit new changes to a repository. I hope others are the same. If I saw a `// deprecated` after the module requirement, it would certainly give me cause to investigate further.

In that case, perhaps there needs to be a mechanism to look up a deprecation message for a given module. Right now it's not straightforward to examine a `go.mod` for an arbitrary Go module version, at least not with the go tool alone.

@jayconrod wrote:

> It seems like deprecation notices should be shown in the same situations as retraction notices #24031
> [...]
> I'd advocate for showing both notices in the same situations: when the user checks for upgrades, and when the user performs an upgrade, regardless of what's in the cache.

This seems reasonable to me, and from an implementation POV may be the most elegant approach (check for both retractions and deprecations at the same time). If we mostly agree both that 1) retractions should be surfaced at all and 2) that deprecations are a feature we want to provide, then we should all be on board with surfacing them to the user in the same way.

--- Comment #22 by rsc ---
@bcmills @jayconrod @matloob, what are your opinions about whether we should move forward with this? I can't quite tell from the discussion above.


--- Comment #23 by bcmills ---
I'm in favor of the `// Deprecated:` comment convention.

I'm also in favor of @Merovius's suggestion to have the `go` command surface deprecated dependencies by adding `// deprecated` comments to the `require` lines of the consumer's `go.mod` file (such as during `go mod tidy` or `go get -u`).

I'm ambivalent on printing warnings to the console. I certainly don't think that should be the _only_ means of surfacing deprecation, but it seems unobjectionable if accompanied by something more durable (such as the aforementioned consumer-side `// deprecated` comments).

--- Comment #24 by jayconrod ---
I think we should move forward with this.

The `// Deprecated:` comment convention seems like the most reasonable way to express this. To be clear, this would deprecate an entire module, not individual versions of that module (I mean this in the sense that major versions are technically different modules).

The comment would be extracted from the `@latest` version of the module. So the deprecation could be changed or removed by releasing a new version.

`go list -m -u` and `go get` will surface the warning, together with retraction warnings.

Commands that update `go.mod` will add `// deprecated` comments to requirements in `go.mod` if they are aware of deprecations. But note that if #40728 is implemented, then most commands will not update `go.mod` by default, and even if they did, most commands won't go out to resolve the `@latest` version. That includes `go mod tidy` unless new dependencies are added. In practice, `go get` would be the only command that would do this for existing dependencies.

I'm not entirely in favor of the `// deprecated` comments by the way, but I don't feel strongly. They seem like an annotation for the dependency, not the module: the edge in the graph rather than the vertex. That said, they are highly visible without being in the way.

--- Comment #25 by rsc ---
Based on the discussion above, this sounds like a **likely accept**.


--- Comment #26 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so accepted.


--- Comment #27 by jaxxstorm ---
> To be clear, this would deprecate an entire module, not individual versions of that module

Does this issue cover this particular use case, or should I open another one?

If someone publishes a broken version of a module, it seems at the moment there's no current way to mark it broken or deprecated. All the other package managers I'm working with (NuGet, NPM and PyPI) currently have this support

--- Comment #28 by jayconrod ---
@jaxxstorm Module version retraction (#24031) will cover that use case. It will ship in Go 1.16.

--- Comment #29 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/301089 mentions this issue: `modfile: parse deprecation notices in module comments`

--- Comment #30 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/306331 mentions this issue: `cmd/go: refactor modload.ListModules to accept bit flags`
