=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU5MTA3Nzk4Mzk= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/46552

==== [Issue Title] ====
syscall: add SyscallN

==== [Issue Body] ====
Currently Go supports calling up to 18 arguments when calling function from a Windows DLL. But there are some SDKs that have functions with 22 and more parameters. It seems there is no workaround for this issue. 

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
Any idea where we should stop?

--- Comment #2 by davecheney ---
If you have a syscall with 21 parameters, you probably missed some. (With apologies to Alan Perlis)

--- Comment #3 by cespare ---
I think that MSVC allows at most 256 parameters in a function definition, so we probably shouldn't need more than that.

--- Comment #4 by alexbrainman ---
> But there are some SDKs that have functions with 22 and more parameters.

Can you provide some reference, please.

Thank you.

Alex

--- Comment #5 by xc218m ---
For example a SDK for LED matrix display controller. One of the functions is:
`int HDAPI Hd_Rt_SendRealTimeText(int nSendType, void *pStrParams, int nRealTimeAreaIndex, int nMaxPageCount, int nColor, int nGray, int nX, int nY, int nWidth, int nHeight, void *pText, int nTextColor, int nBackGroupColor, int nStyle, void *pFontName, int nFontHeight, int nShowEffect, int nShowSpeed,int nStayTime, int nLiveTime, int bSaveToFlash, void *pDeviceGUID);`


--- Comment #6 by Profpatsch ---
This is going to be sufficient, since 24 is the highest number. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RkP_OGDCLY0

--- Comment #7 by xc218m ---
It's not theoretical. It's from SDK for these controllers:
[https://www.huidu.cn/en/monochromatic-and-dual-color-network-port-control-card.html](https://www.huidu.cn/en/monochromatic-and-dual-color-network-port-control-card.html)
You can't find it, because it is not publicly available.
I already used another language for the SDK, so it's not a big problem for me. 
I tried to add Syscall24 myself but I think that has to be changes in `asmcgocall` function too. 

--- Comment #8 by networkimprov ---
cc @zx2c4 @mattn 

--- Comment #9 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #10 by zx2c4 ---
> It's not theoretical. It's from SDK for these controllers:
> https://www.huidu.cn/en/monochromatic-and-dual-color-network-port-control-card.html

Just so we're clear: this isn't actually to call any Windows system API or something, but just to call some arbitrary C functions with tons of arguments from that SDK, correct? (Not that that's necessarily a bad thing.)

--- Comment #11 by mdempsky ---
> Any idea where we should stop?

We could add a variadic function and then we'd be done, even when NTv6 extends the max syscall list to 640KB. We already support variadic syscalls for Proc.Call and LazyProc.Call.

**Edit:** By which I mean, we support the API, and the compiler supports the unsafe.Pointer-safety-rules magic required to make it work. Those functions in turn currently rely on calling the SyscallNN functions.

However, it also looks like the SyscallNN functions then eventually trampoline back into a common, variadic cgo stub anyway. So it seems like the fundamentals are all in place already. We just need to cleanup the implementation, and maybe expose an extra primitive. (I don't know if Windows users care about directly issuing syscall.Syscall21, or if this only affects users indirectly via Proc.Call/LazyProc.Call.)

--- Comment #12 by alexbrainman ---
> Just so we're clear: this isn't actually to call any Windows system API or something, but just to call some arbitrary C functions with tons of arguments from that SDK, correct? (Not that that's necessarily a bad thing.)

I agree with Jason sentiment, that this is pretty rare.

And since 24 is the Highest Number, Syscall24 should be the last API we will ever need. It shouldn't be difficult to add these APIs. We should also adjust runtime.TestSyscall18 to verify the change.

> We could add a variadic function ...

Adding Syscall21 and Syscall24 is easy comparing to adding and implementing new API. And there is only 1 Syscall21 user so far. So we should not invest too much effort here.

Alternatively we can say no to Syscall21 and Syscall24. We would loose users of those controllers.

Alex

--- Comment #13 by zx2c4 ---
> However, it also looks like the SyscallNN functions then eventually trampoline back into a common, variadic cgo stub anyway.

If we're already trampolining back to a varidac sub, we should just make the primary API into this varadic, and cut out all the middle pieces. We can then rework mksyscall and that codegen around the more direct varadic route. The SyscallXX helpers will then be left around for backwards compat. That would address the concerns of this proposal, and also clean up the API considerably.

--- Comment #14 by ianlancetaylor ---
Good point, writing a varargs version seems clearly preferable.  The signature would presumably be something like

    SyscallN(trap uintptr, args ...uintptr) (r1, r2 uintptr, err Errno)

I think we can do that safely using the `//go:uintptrescapes` annotation.

--- Comment #15 by rsc ---
OK, so it sounds like we should do SyscallN.


--- Comment #16 by rsc ---
We could limit this to Windows, but it seems like we should just implement it for all systems. 
Non-Windows systems have a clearer limit, and we can handle N up to that limit and then return an error otherwise.



--- Comment #17 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #18 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #19 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/336550 mentions this issue: `syscall: add SyscallN`

--- Comment #20 by cristaloleg ---
Any info about performance changes? 👀 

--- Comment #21 by mdempsky ---
I wouldn't expect any performance changes from this, but I think it would be great if someone wanted to measure and report back.
