=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU0MTkxNzA5MDQ= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/30715

==== [Issue Title] ====
net/http: add MaxBytesError

==== [Issue Body] ====
### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
$ go version
go version go1.12 darwin/amd64
</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?
Yes


### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?

<details><summary><code>go env</code> Output</summary><br><pre>
$ go env
GOARCH="amd64"
GOBIN="/Users/foo/go/bin"
GOCACHE="/Users/foo/Library/Caches/go-build"
GOEXE=""
GOFLAGS=""
GOHOSTARCH="amd64"
GOHOSTOS="darwin"
GOOS="darwin"
GOPATH="/Users/foo/go"
GOPROXY=""
GORACE=""
GOROOT="/usr/local/Cellar/go/1.12/libexec"
GOTMPDIR=""
GOTOOLDIR="/usr/local/Cellar/go/1.12/libexec/pkg/tool/darwin_amd64"
GCCGO="gccgo"
CC="clang"
CXX="clang++"
CGO_ENABLED="1"
GOMOD=""
CGO_CFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_CPPFLAGS=""
CGO_CXXFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_FFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_LDFLAGS="-g -O2"
PKG_CONFIG="pkg-config"
GOGCCFLAGS="-fPIC -m64 -pthread -fno-caret-diagnostics -Qunused-arguments -fmessage-length=0 -fdebug-prefix-map=/var/folders/lf/rbfblwvx6rx3xhm68yksmqjwdv1dsf/T/go-build261266046=/tmp/go-build -gno-record-gcc-switches -fno-common"
</pre></details>

### What did you do?

Upon limiting the maximum request size (by using `MaxBytesReader` as in https://stackoverflow.com/a/28292505/381140) I wanted to specially handle too large request body error in a clean way with error type assertion, and return custom response body.
More people asked for the same feature: https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/golang-nuts/gMzVGDgPyrY


### What did you expect to see?
I expected net/http to have `RequestBodyTooLargeError` defined and returned by `MaxBytesReader` so type assertion can be done instead of error message comparison.


### What did you see instead?
Trivial error string implementation is returned https://golang.org/src/net/http/request.go#L1114


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by perillo ---
There is a similar issue in the `parsePostForm` function: https://golang.org/src/net/http/request.go#L1158.

--- Comment #2 by s3rj1k ---
@rsc At a very least set those string as constants, current code looks ugly and stands against all the things that we love in golang. 

`const http.StatusRequestEntityTooLargeMessage = "http: request body too large"`

--- Comment #3 by earthboundkid ---
@rsc, I think this issue fell off the tracker because it's from before the "Proposal" tag. Can this be tagged? If the proposal is accepted, I'm happy to file the CL.

--- Comment #4 by ianlancetaylor ---
CC @neild 

--- Comment #5 by earthboundkid ---
FWIW, #41493 is a dupe with all positive feedback. I propose that MaxByteReader should return errors of the type `ErrorMaxBytesExceeded struct { MaxSize int64 }` that can be checked with `errors.As`.

--- Comment #6 by neild ---
A [`http.MaxBytesReader`](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#MaxBytesReader) is defined as "similar to io.LimitReader", but "returns a non-EOF error for a Read beyond the limit".

Wrapping the incoming request body in a `MaxBytesReader` is the recommended way to set a limit on the size of an incoming request body. It interacts with other elements of HTTP request processing in some non-obvious ways: For example, `(*Request).ParseForm` sets a 10MiB limit on the size of parsed form data, except when the request `Body` is a `MaxBytesReader`.

This proposal, as I understand it, is to return a defined error when a `MaxBytesReader` hits the read limit.

This seems reasonable to me.

The `net/http` package defines only one exported error type, `http.ProtocolError`, which is deprecated. It defines a number of sentinel error values. Since the creator of a `MaxBytesReader` knows what maximum size they provided it, I think that providing this information in the error response is unnecessary, and this should be a sentinel error. Perhaps:

```
// ErrRequestBodyTooLarge is returned after a ReadCloser created by MaxBytesReader reads
// past its limit.
var ErrRequestBodyTooLarge = errors.New("http: request body too large")
```

A couple questions, and my proposed answers:

* Does `Close` return `ErrRequestBodyTooLarge` if the limit is exceeded? Currently `Close` does not return an error in this case, but I think it should.
* Does `Read` return `ErrRequestBodyTooLarge`, or an error wrapping this one? I don't have a strong opinion here. If this was a new package, I'd argue for wrapping, but given the extensive use of bare sentinels in `net/http` I think consistency argues for returning an unwrapped `ErrRequestBodyTooLarge`.

--- Comment #7 by earthboundkid ---
> Since the creator of a MaxBytesReader knows what maximum size they provided it, I think that providing this information in the error response is unnecessary, and this should be a sentinel error.

Not necessarily. I want to wrap different handlers in different middleware, so that the processImage handler has a 25MB limit, but the processUser handler has a 1MB limit, for example. I want to be able to write generic error response middleware that can prompt the user with different messages for different overages.

--- Comment #8 by earthboundkid ---
What if instead of defining an error type, we add `http.IsMaxBytesError(err error) (size int)`? If the error isn’t from MaxBytesReader, it returns 0, otherwise it returns a positive number. It’s easier to use than a defined type and lets us hide the implementation details. 

--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
If it is going to be generated by MaxBytesReader, perhaps it should be a MaxBytesError?
@neild are you satisfied by the justification above for including the number of bytes?
Or should we just do ErrMaxBytes / ErrRequestBodyTooLarge?



--- Comment #10 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #11 by earthboundkid ---
I would be happy with either of

```
type MaxBytesError int64

type MaxBytesError struct {
    Limit int64
}
```

The struct version is more extensible, but I don't foresee it needing extension, so int64 version is fine too.

~~A side-effect of this change is the secret [requestTooLarger interface](https://cs.opensource.google/go/go/+/refs/tags/go1.17.2:src/net/http/request.go;l=1165) could be retired.~~ I think it would probably stick around.

--- Comment #12 by rsc ---
ping @neild re https://github.com/golang/go/issues/30715#issuecomment-947904802


--- Comment #13 by neild ---
I'm not really enthusiastic about increasing `net/http`'s API surface with another type, but `MaxBytesError` seems reasonable. (I'd say that you can just wrap the io.ReadCloser returned by `MaxBytesReader` with your own type that adds whatever error you want--but there's a type assertion for the case when a `Request.Body` is a `*maxBytesReader`, so you can't actually do that).

```
type MaxBytesError struct {
  Limit int64
}
```

I don't think we should add `http.IsMaxBytesError`; error predicates are a perfectly fine pattern, but we don't have any in `net/http` now. A type fits the existing API better.

A struct is better than an `int64`. Better to always plan for extension rather than guess when you might need it.

We should maybe define that `MaxBytesError{}` is equivalent to any `MaxBytesError`, so you can write this if you don't care about the size:

```
if errors.Is(err, &http.MaxBytesError{}) { ... }
```

tl;dr, I'm reluctantly in favor of adding `http.MaxBytesError`.

--- Comment #14 by rsc ---
We probably don't need the special definition at the end.
You can use

if errors.As(err, new(*http.MaxBytesError)) { ... }


--- Comment #15 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/361397 mentions this issue: `net/http: add MaxBytesError`

--- Comment #16 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #17 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #18 by earthboundkid ---
Issue title should be changed to "net/http: add MaxBytesError".
