=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU1Mzc5MTQwNDg= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/36141

==== [Issue Title] ====
time: add ExternalNow, etc for external time and timers

==== [Issue Body] ====
**Update May 5 2021**: The current proposed API is in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/36141#issuecomment-828667067.  - rsc
- - -

### Vocabulary:

- Program time: monotonic, but stops when the computer is in S3 sleep.
- Real time: monotonic, but continues to advance when the computer is in S3 sleep.
- Wall time: non-monotonic thing on your wristwatch or wall clock that NTP messes with. This one plays no role in this discussion here at all.
- Operating system: this always refers to the tuple of OS+ParticularVersion+ParticularConfiguration.

(These vocabulary terms can be nitpicked - maybe program time should be cpu time or something - but we've been using them prior in discussion, so let's continue to use them so as not to introduce confusion.)

### Proposal:

- Find some way to introduce "real time" semantics into Go, which currently mostly uses "program time", except on Windows, where it's always been "real time" for historical reasons.

### Motivation:

- Network protocols need to keep track of timeouts independent of whether a computer is asleep, since parties on a network exist in the real world, rather than virtualized on a CPU.

### Landscape:

- On some operating systems, the poll/select/kqueue/WaitFor*Object/futex family of functions takes a timeout that is measured in "real time", and on others measured in "program time".
- Most operating systems support a "program time" counter. Some support a "real time" counter, but some do not, depending on configuration or existence of S3.
- Most operating systems offer a notifier for resuming from sleep, though some may not, depending on configuration or existence of S3.
- Important observation: operating systems that do not offer a notifier support "program time" rather than "real time".

### Possibilities:

a. Make the existing `time.` and `time.Timer.` functions use "real time" exclusively, when possible. Introduce a function `runtime.RealtimeTimers() bool` to indicate whether Go successfully enabled "real time" timers rather than "program time" timers, the fallback.

b. Introduce additional duplicated functions to `time.` and `time.Timer.` that use "real time" rather than "program time". Introduce a function `time.RealtimeTimersAreRealTime() bool` to indicate whether Go successfully enabled "real time" timers on this new set of functions, or if the new set of functions behave identically to the old.

c. Introduce additional duplicated functions to `time.` and `time.Timer.` that use "real time" rather than "program time", and throw an error if "real time" capabilities aren't available, forcing users to introduce verbose fallback code if they only want to support "real time" opportunistically.

d. Add a function `runtime.UseRealtimeTimers() error` that attempts to change the runtime to use "real time" timers everywhere, like (a).

e. Add runtime function `runtime.UseRealtimeTimers(yes bool) error` that attempts to change the runtime to use "real time" or "program time" timers everywhere, like (a) but the ability to toggle. Add runtime function `runtime.RealtimeTimers() bool` to indicate the current state. The default start-state would be either OS-defined or "real time" or "program time", depending on what we decide.

f. Other options?

My personal preference would be (a) or (e), but I'm open to discussion.

CC @ianlancetaylor @bradfitz @aclements @rsc 

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by zephyrtronium ---
Making time sense a configuration option in `runtime` as in (d) or (e) means that packages which want to use real time can't be composed with packages which want to use program time, hence almost no one can depend on either behavior. That seems like probably the worst option.

From reading the discussion at #35482, it seems to me like the only cases where real time is mandatory are cases where the program interacts with the outside world, and furthermore that all cases where the program interacts with the outside world really *want* real time, even if they currently don't (or previously didn't) use it due to operating system behavior. That implies that the suggestion in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/35482#issuecomment-564325866 of `TimerAt`, `SleepUntil`, &c., which I believe is a strict subset of your possibility (b), could and should be used everywhere in `net`. At the risk of bikeshedding, I would suggest that those new functions could be in a new `x/time` package that has runtime support, but then `net` can't use them. Maybe a new `time/realtime` package would help keep the API surface area of `time` small for typical wall time users while supporting those who must have real time.

As a supporting anecdote: I have an IRC bot that I run using Go 1.13.0 on my local Windows machine, which I also put to sleep from time to time. Sometimes-but-not-always after waking my computer, the program will actively spin for 300 seconds while waiting for the network deadlines to "actually" happen. I haven't tried it yet with Go 1.13.3+, but from what I understand, that behavior would be fixed there – the deadlines would always occur immediately after the computer wakes. This indicates to me that real time is the correct time for all network protocols, not just for WireGuard.

--- Comment #2 by zx2c4 ---
> This indicates to me that real time is the correct time for all network protocols, not just for WireGuard.

Yes, probably more so than not. Brad wanted "real time" on a networking CL recently too and settled for the unreliable "wall time" instead.

--- Comment #3 by networkimprov ---
We're expecting a separate proposal from the Go team along the lines described by @aclements in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/35482#issuecomment-564569328.

I posted some followup questions to it in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/35482#issuecomment-565295627

See also #24595, #35012, https://github.com/golang/go/issues/29485#issuecomment-450703617

@bradfitz mentions his wall (i.e. pseudo-real) timers in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/35482#issuecomment-565553612

It would probably help if Go allowed us to set a suspend/resume handler.

Note that network protocol use between apps on the same machine is also common, and would generally not want real-time timers.

--- Comment #4 by ianlancetaylor ---
I agree with @zephyrtronium that a global setting as proposed in possibilities d and e is a non-starter.  Large programs include many packages, and those packages may legitimately have different requirements.

Possibility a is essentially #24595 as a choice made for all systems where possible.  The Linux kernel attempted to make this choice, and reverted it, as discussed at https://www.spinics.net/lists/linux-tip-commits/msg43709.html.  Watchdog timers failing on resume are a particular issue.  So are timers for single user games.  Very roughly, timers associated with behavior of other programs on the current system, or with behavior of the user of the system, seem likely to want "program time".  Timers associated with behavior of other systems on the network seem likely to want "real time".  Given that Go has historically used "program time" on all systems other than Windows, shifting all systems to "real time" seems likely to hurt more existing code than it helps.

The distinction between possibilities b and c is subtle, and it's not yet clear to me that it matters.  If we have a way to detect that a system was suspended, which is the only case where "program time" differs from "real time", then we can always implement timers that use "real time".

--- Comment #5 by ianlancetaylor ---
From the API perspective I think the relevant functions and methods are:

- `time.Sleep`
- `time.NewTimer` (and its variants `time.After` and `time.AfterFunc`)
- `time.(*Timer).Reset`
- `net.Conn.SetDeadline` (and `SetReadDeadline` and `SetWriteDeadline` and implementations)
- `os.(*File).SetDeadline` (and `SetReadDeadline` and `SetWriteDeadline`)

If there are other relevant functions/methods, please point them out.

We also need to pay particular attention to `time.Sub` and the related functions `time.Until` and `time.Since`.  Currently `time.Sub` sometimes computes "real time" and sometimes computes "program time".  This is documented in the time package docs, which say

> On some systems the monotonic clock will stop if the computer goes to sleep. On such a system, t.Sub(u) may not accurately reflect the actual time that passed between t and u.

If we are going to make changes in this area, it would be nice to eliminate this inconsistency if possible.

--- Comment #6 by ianlancetaylor ---
As others have said, one way that an API can permit programs to distinguish between "real time" and "program time" is to use the difference between `time.Duration` and `time.Time`.  Currently `time.NewTimer` takes an argument of type `time.Duration`.  We could define that as meaning to send a value on the channel after that duration in "program time" (I believe that is the current meaning on all systems other than Windows 8 and later).

We could add  a new function `time.NewTimerAt` which would take an argument of `time.Time`.  That would be defined as sending a value on the channel on or shortly after that instant in time.  Thus `time.NewTimer(d)` would measure time in "program time" while `time.NewTimerAt(time.Now().Add(d)` would measure time in "real time."

A disadvantage of this approach is that `net.Conn.SetDeadline` and friends already take a `time.Time` value.  By analogy with the change in timers, we would expect to change the existing meaning of `net.Conn.SetDeadline` to measure in "real time" rather than "program time".  But that change might affect existing programs that use deadlines for network communication on the same machine.

--- Comment #7 by ianlancetaylor ---
Turning to implementation, I believe that we can straightforwardly implement both "real time" and "program time" timers if we have a way to receive a notification that the system has woken up from a suspension.  Unfortunately, as far as I know, GNU/Linux provides no such notification capability.  We can detect a suspension after the fact by comparing the results of `clock_gettime` using `CLOCK_MONOTONIC` and `CLOCK_BOOTTIME`.  But we don't want to be continually checking those times.

The problem is that for any sort of timer we need to have a way to sleep until the timer is ready to fire.  To support both timers that work in "program time" and timers that work in "real time" we need to have a way to sleep in "program time" and in "real time", or a way to detect that we've woken up from suspend and need to recalculate sleep times.

As far as I know, the only way to sleep in "real time" on GNU/Linux is via `timer_create`, which is somewhat horrible in that it reports timer completion by sending a signal.

I don't know what is available on other systems.

--- Comment #8 by networkimprov ---
systemd sees suspend/resume events. Go could provide an optional resume hook that pings a unix socket or other pollable widget.

--- Comment #9 by zx2c4 ---
> As far as I know, the only way to sleep in "real time" on GNU/Linux is via `timer_create`, which is somewhat horrible in that it reports timer completion by sending a signal.

There's `timerfd_create(2)`, actually, which gives you a normal fd that you can then netpoll on. I talked to tglx, the kernel timer maintainer, a few months ago about adding boottime support to `futex(2)`, and he seemed interested, but of course kernel changes mean something far off in the future.

I'll do some research on Linux sleep resumption notification mechanisms. Tailing dmesg sounds pretty bad. Hooking into systemd or android power binder misery or similar sounds less bad but still  bad. I wonder if there's some magic sysfs file we can epoll on. I'll look around.

> I agree with @zephyrtronium that a global setting as proposed in possibilities d and e is a non-starter. Large programs include many packages, and those packages may legitimately have different requirements.

Yea, I was afraid of that. I guess runtime has a lot of global nobs, but I understand that you don't want to add more, especially important ones.

> Possibility a is essentially #24595 as a choice made for all systems where possible.

Sounds like you don't like that either. I'm biased based on my own needs of course, but something to consider is the slight misunderstanding implied by @aclements's original nomenclature we've been using. "Program time" isn't actually the time spent by a program, since the scheduler implies it might not actually be running that whole time, or might be SIGSTOP'd or something. That means that ordinary programs may very well see large leaps in "program time", just as they will for "real time" in the case of resuming from suspend. With large leaps being a potential either way, what's the point of the distinction? Seems like programs are better off coding around "real time" assumptions since "program time" assumptions don't actually apply in the case of SIGSTOP or scheduler contention and such. Maybe the distinction between the two is only important for something like watchdog timers? That seems like more of the exception than the rule though. But, as said, I'm a bit biased here.

> The distinction between possibilities b and c is subtle, and it's not yet clear to me that it matters. If we have a way to detect that a system was suspended, which is the only case where "program time" differs from "real time", then we can always implement timers that use "real time".

Do you mean to say that we could perhaps add the new API without needing a function to determine whether or not we have a detection mechanism (or without returning an error), because in the case where we don't have a detection mechanism, there is no S3 sleep anyway, so we might as well consider them the same? That would be fine with me, I suppose.

> If there are other relevant functions/methods, please point them out.

time.Ticker is another one.

> We also need to pay particular attention to time.Sub and the related functions time.Until and time.Since. Currently time.Sub sometimes computes "real time" and sometimes computes "program time". This is documented in the time package docs, which say
>> On some systems the monotonic clock will stop if the computer goes to sleep. On such a system, t.Sub(u) may not accurately reflect the actual time that passed between t and u.

Right now a time object has internally both wall time and program time. We could slow it down further and have it always fetch real time. And then introduce more comparison functions. But that seems tricky. Alternatively, we could change the construction functions, for NowReal() and NowProgram() or something, but then there are hairy issues on what to do when comparing unlike objects. Or maybe we'll just want to introduce a whole new object all together?

> A disadvantage of this approach is that net.Conn.SetDeadline and friends already take a time.Time value. By analogy with the change in timers, we would expect to change the existing meaning of net.Conn.SetDeadline to measure in "real time" rather than "program time". But that change might affect existing programs that use deadlines for network communication on the same machine.

But actually, isn't the net case the one area where we actually do want to prefer "real time"? For example, see Brad's CLs where he tries to approximate "real time" by using "wall time" (via Round(0)). So maybe that's okay.

--- Comment #10 by networkimprov ---
On laptops, programs are rarely stopped, and if they are, it affects network peers on the same machine. Suspend/resume is frequent, and does not affect peers on the same machine.

--- Comment #11 by ianlancetaylor ---
> Yea, I was afraid of that. I guess runtime has a lot of global nobs, but I understand that you don't want to add more, especially important ones.

As far as I know the runtime package does not have any knobs that change the meaning of any APIs.

--- Comment #12 by ianlancetaylor ---
I did forget about `timerfd_create`, thanks for pointing it out.

--- Comment #13 by ianlancetaylor ---
> But actually, isn't the net case the one area where we actually do want to prefer "real time"?

In general, yes, but not always.  For processes communicating on the same system, "program time" may be expected.  We could go ahead and decide to change it anyhow, but it requires thought.

--- Comment #14 by ianlancetaylor ---
> Sounds like you don't like that either. I'm biased based on my own needs of course, but something to consider is the slight misunderstanding implied by @aclements's original nomenclature we've been using. "Program time" isn't actually the time spent by a program, since the scheduler implies it might not actually be running that whole time, or might be SIGSTOP'd or something. That means that ordinary programs may very well see large leaps in "program time", just as they will for "real time" in the case of resuming from suspend. With large leaps being a potential either way, what's the point of the distinction? Seems like programs are better off coding around "real time" assumptions since "program time" assumptions don't actually apply in the case of SIGSTOP or scheduler contention and such. Maybe the distinction between the two is only important for something like watchdog timers? That seems like more of the exception than the rule though. But, as said, I'm a bit biased here.

It's true of course that "program time" (which I agree is a minomer) can see delays.  But consider the case of an interactive game with no network connection that sets up dozens of timers for different times that cause events to occur in the game.  If the user suspends a laptop while playing the game, those timers should also suspend; they shouldn't all fire when the laptop is resumed.

--- Comment #15 by networkimprov ---
Assuming the Windows runtime switches to program/monotonic time, it might help to provide a switch (e.g. env var) to return it to real/boot time.

Conversely, it would help for 1.14 to have a switch to enable program time; the work for that is mostly done.

--- Comment #16 by zx2c4 ---
Alright here's where we are with technical solutions for supporting "real time":

### Windows
- Reading from `0x7ffe0008` returns "real time", as we do now.
- The `WaitFor` functions we're using for sleeps use "real time" on Windows 7.
- The `WaitFor` functions we're using for sleeps use "program time" on Windows 8+, but `PowerRegisterSuspendResumeNotification` is also available for Windows 8+, so we can interrupt the sleep and recalculate. This is what the Go runtime does now.

### Linux
- `clock_gettime(CLOCK_BOOTTIME)` returns "real time" and is in the VDSO in modern kernels.
- `timerfd_create(CLOCK_BOOTTIME)` creates something we can sleep with in "real time".

### macOS
- `mach_continuous_time` returns "real time".
- Passing in `NOTE_MACH_CONTINUOUS_TIME` as the flags argument to any of the event function causes the sleep to be in "real time".

I haven't looked into the BSDs yet.

--- Comment #17 by networkimprov ---
It might be essential to make real timers on Windows use a high-precision source; current resolution is 2ms, which isn't enough for some protocols, for example https://github.com/golang/go/issues/29485#issuecomment-450703617.

Instead of changing time.Sub() to compute real time, we could consider an API which provides any delta between program & real time, e.g. `func SuspendedTotal() Duration`.

Re SetDeadline() computing a duration internally, I'd suggest this API, and deprecating Set*Deadline().
```
func (c *T) SetDeadlineAt(t time.Time)
func (c *T) SetDeadlineFor(d time.Duration)
```

--- Comment #18 by balasanjay ---
`SetDeadline` is also on interfaces (like `net.Conn`), where we cannot add methods directly.

--- Comment #19 by networkimprov ---
True; requiring a type-assert to call a new method.

Maybe new fields in net.Dialer & net.ListenConfig should set the meaning of the Set*Deadline() time.Time argument.

--- Comment #20 by beoran ---
I would prefer a whole new API, in a separate package, 'time/realtime' that has all the functionality of the time package but that explicitly uses real time clocks on all platform. The current `time` package then should use program time clocks on all platforms. That is IMHO the cleanest solution. 

And @ianlancetaylor, as an aside, thanks of thinking about game programming using Go. I definitely appreciate that core Go developers are starting to take non-server applications for Go seriously. As you say, for single player games, timers of game events really need to be suspended when the program is suspended.

As an aside, over 20 years ago, I learned programming because I wanted to make games. Likewise I want to teach my daughter how to program Go by letting her make games. If we want Go to become more popular, then we have to make it even easier to use for game programming as well.

--- Comment #21 by networkimprov ---
@ianlancetaylor is the Go team working on a concrete proposal? If so, is there an ETA?

Presumably we'd want to see a draft implementation early in 1.15 cycle...

--- Comment #22 by ianlancetaylor ---
There is no ETA.

--- Comment #23 by beoran ---
@networkimprov Perhaps this doesn't need to be in the Go standard library? I think it would not be that hard to write an external realtime module that uses real time timers with high precision.

--- Comment #24 by networkimprov ---
@beoran, it's discussed at length in #35482

--- Comment #25 by beoran ---
I looked at that discussion, and after that I'm not very happy with the current state of things. What I would like is consistency between platforms. The WireGuard project should not have to use a patched runtime on Linux, but to me it looks like they got a patch into the Windows Go runtime that worsened the inconsistency overall.

As I said above, I would solve the problem by making 'time'  use program time/wall time, and have a 'time/realtime' package for real time/monotonic clocks. The former can be done relatively easily in Go itself, the latter could be implemented as a third party library at first.

--- Comment #26 by anjmao ---
@zx2c4 Cloudflare's rust WireGuard implementation uses timerfd_create with CLOCK_BOOTTIME on linux and kevent on BSD. I think for WireGuard go implementation we could use the same principle (basically implementing separate package). Would you accept a PR if I implement it directly in [wireguard-go](https://git.zx2c4.com/wireguard-go/about) repo as a subpackage? In Mysterium Network we use wireguard-go as a library and our own library is consumed by other users so patching Go is not an option for us.

--- Comment #27 by zx2c4 ---
> @zx2c4 Cloudflare's rust WireGuard implementation uses timerfd_create with CLOCK_BOOTTIME on linux and kevent on BSD. I think for WireGuard go implementation we could use the same principle (basically implementing separate package). Would you accept a PR if I implement it directly in [wireguard-go](https://git.zx2c4.com/wireguard-go/about) repo as a subpackage? In Mysterium Network we use wireguard-go as a library and our own library is consumed by other users so patching Go is not an option for us.

If you have a good multi platform way of solving this, I'd be very much happy to accept a patch. Feel free to contribute as much as you like! Thanks a bunch.

--- Comment #28 by networkimprov ---
@anjmao if you can make that subpackage support Windows, then Go 1.15 can switch to monotonic timing on Windows without hurting Wireguard or adding a new boottime API (altho the latter should be added eventually).

--- Comment #29 by anjmao ---
There is some progress for [realtime](https://github.com/anjmao/realtime) package. For now I implemented only subset of std time API needed for WireGuard and used if for wireguard-go on my fork [here](https://github.com/anjmao/wireguard-go/tree/use-realtime-pkg). 

1. For Darwin/BSD timers and tickers I used kqueue and kevent syscalls. To fetch nanotime ClockGettime(CLOCK_MONOTONIC_RAW) syscall.
2. For Linux timers and tickers I used SYS_TIMERFD_CREATE with CLOCK_BOOTTIME and epoll. To fetch nanotime ClockGettime(CLOCK_BOOTTIME) syscall.
3. For Windows no progress yet. Need to find or buy Windows machine 😆 

After running benchmarks I could definitely see slowdown compared to std. As I expected pprof points increased syscall calls, but for wireguard-go running on macOS I didn't saw any big impact in performance yet. time.Sleep seems to be hardest to implement correctly. For now I just used `<-NewTimer(d).C` internally since I can't access current g as it is accessible only from internal runtime package. 

--- Comment #30 by zx2c4 ---
Nice progress. Glad to hear it's working, or beginning to anyway.

> After running benchmarks I could definitely see slowdown compared to std. 

Right, this is why I am hesitant to go with this approach... Your work might be best suggested as an API proposal for 1.15, which you could then send this as a CL to implement.
