=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU3MDY3MjQzMDk= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/41563

==== [Issue Title] ====
reflect: add StructField.IsExported and Method.IsExported

==== [Issue Body] ====
The `StructField.PkgPath` field is populated if and only if the field is unexported. However, there is a hit to readability:
```go
for i := 0; i < t.NumField(); i++ {
    f := t.Field(i)
    if f.PkgPath != "" {
        continue
    }
    ...
}
```

It's not obvious to most readers why the `f.PkgPath != ""` check exist. For this reason, a vast majority of cases have a comment that says:
```go
    // Skip unexported fields.
    if f.PkgPath != "" {
        continue
    }
```

This documentation seems unnecessary if we had just added a helper method on `StructField` like:
```go
// IsExported reports whether the struct field is exported.
func (f StructField) IsExported() bool {
    return f.PkgPath == ""
}
```

Thus, use of it becomes obvious from a readability perspective:
```go
for i := 0; i < t.NumField(); i++ {
    f := t.Field(i)
    if !f.IsExported() {
        continue
    }
    ...
}
```

Bikeshedding: I don't have a preference whether this should be called `IsExported` or simply `Exported`. The former matches `IsValid`, `IsNil`, or `IsZero`, while the latter matches `StructField.Anonymous`. It seems that the `reflect` package is already internally inconsistent about naming of predicate functionality.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
Minor side note: the field name `Anonymous` is already wrong, as we now refer to that concept as an embedded field.  So although we can't change `Anonymous` we shouldn't take it as a precedent for anything.

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
I'm OK with adding IsExported() bool.
I wouldn't want to add a new struct field that could be out of sync with PkgPath.


--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
Based on the discussion above, this seems like a **likely accept**.


--- Comment #4 by dsnet ---
I should note that we probably want to add an `IsExported` method to the `Method` type as well since it has a `PkgPath` field with the same semantics.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
SGTM

--- Comment #6 by dsnet ---
Another note: #22075 makes it such that `NumMethod` no longer counts unexported methods, which subsequently means that you can't retrieve unexported methods. If this is the case, we should mark `Method.PkgPath` as deprecated instead of adding a `Method.IsExported` method.

\cc @mdempsky 

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
That change to NumMethod is likely to be rolled back.


--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
No change in consensus, so accepted.


--- Comment #9 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/266197 mentions this issue: `reflect: add Method.IsExported and StructField.IsExported methods`
