=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU4Nzc4Mzk2ODc= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/46001

==== [Issue Title] ====
net/http: use nontransitional IDNA processing

==== [Issue Body] ====
<!--
Please answer these questions before submitting your issue. Thanks!
For questions please use one of our forums: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/Questions
-->

### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
$ go version
go version go1.16.3 linux/amd64
</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?

Yes

### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?

<details><summary><code>go env</code> Output</summary><br><pre>
$ go env
GO111MODULE=""
GOARCH="amd64"
GOBIN=""
GOCACHE="/home/timothy-gu/.cache/go-build"
GOENV="/home/timothy-gu/.config/go/env"
GOEXE=""
GOFLAGS=""
GOHOSTARCH="amd64"
GOHOSTOS="linux"
GOINSECURE=""
GOMODCACHE="/home/timothy-gu/go/pkg/mod"
GONOPROXY=""
GONOSUMDB=""
GOOS="linux"
GOPATH="/home/timothy-gu/go"
GOPRIVATE=""
GOPROXY="https://proxy.golang.org,direct"
GOROOT="/usr/lib/go"
GOSUMDB="sum.golang.org"
GOTMPDIR=""
GOTOOLDIR="/usr/lib/go/pkg/tool/linux_amd64"
GOVCS=""
GOVERSION="go1.16.3"
GCCGO="gccgo"
AR="ar"
CC="gcc"
CXX="g++"
CGO_ENABLED="1"
GOMOD="/tmp/gourl/go.mod"
CGO_CFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_CPPFLAGS=""
CGO_CXXFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_FFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_LDFLAGS="-g -O2"
PKG_CONFIG="pkg-config"
GOGCCFLAGS="-fPIC -m64 -pthread -fmessage-length=0 -fdebug-prefix-map=/tmp/go-build343371698=/tmp/go-build -gno-record-gcc-switches"
</pre></details>

### What did you do?

<!--
If possible, provide a recipe for reproducing the error.
A complete runnable program is good.
A link on play.golang.org is best.
-->

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"net/http"
)

func main() {
	resp, _ := http.Get("http://straße.de/")
	fmt.Println("straße", resp.Header.Get("Content-Length"))

	resp, _ = http.Get("http://strasse.de/")
	fmt.Println("strasse", resp.Header.Get("Content-Length"))

	resp, _ = http.Get("http://xn--strae-oqa.de/")
	fmt.Println("xn--strae-oqa", resp.Header.Get("Content-Length"))
}
```


### What did you expect to see?

straße.de should get resolved to xn--strae-oqa per IDNA [Nontransitional processing](https://unicode.org/reports/tr46/#Compatibility_Processing) and [DENIC announcement](https://www.denic.de/en/whats-new/press-releases/article/characters-permitted-in-de-domains-soon-to-include-ss/). This is the case on Firefox and Safari when you type the URL into the address bar. It is also the behavior of curl, wget, Node.js, and the browser [WHATWG URL Standard](https://url.spec.whatwg.org/).

```
straße 33560
strasse 6637
xn--strae-oqa 33560
```

### What did you see instead?

straße.de got resolved instead to strasse.de. This is the current behavior in Chrome, and from what Ryan Sleevi implied in https://crbug.com/694157, other pieces of Google software as well. (The same behavior is in Python as well, but that's a bit unfair, since Python's IDNA encoding is effectively [frozen to IDNA 2003](https://docs.python.org/3/library/codecs.html#module-encodings.idna).)

```
straße 6637
strasse 6637
xn--strae-oqa 33560
```

### Discussion

Which way to go here is ultimately a policy change. The arguments for keeping transitional processing are:

* Maintains strict compatibility with previous versions of Go
* Maintains compatibility with Chrome, and Google products in general

The arguments for moving to nontransitional processing are:

* Aligns with the rest of the world
* Aligns with web standards

It appears to me that implementing things from web standards and first principles is part of the Go ethos, which would lean in favor of using nontransitional processing. However, maintaining compatibility is also a powerful motivation.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by seankhliao ---
cc @bradfitz @rsc @empijei 

--- Comment #2 by networkimprov ---
@ianlancetaylor possible proposal?

--- Comment #3 by ianlancetaylor ---
I'll let net/http maintainers comment.

--- Comment #4 by networkimprov ---
cc @fraenkel @neild 

--- Comment #5 by neild ---
Empirical testing of navigating to http://straße.de/ in various browsers (version whatever was installed on the machine closest to me at the time):

* Chrome: strasse.de
* Safari: xn--strae-oqa.de
* Firefox: xn--strae-oqa.de
* Edge: strasse.de

My most-convenient Linux box has `curl` 7.74.0 with IDNA support and resolves `http://straße.de/` to xn--strae-oqa.de. I also  found [CVE-2016-8625](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2016-8625) for libcurl, describing the use of transitional processing in `libcurl` before version 7.51.0 as a security vulnerability.

There appears to be no consistency in browser behavior.

However, given that:

* the `.de` registry has been issuing domains containing `ß` for [about a decade](https://www.denic.de/en/whats-new/press-releases/article/characters-permitted-in-de-domains-soon-to-include-ss/)
* many browsers (and client libraries like `libcurl`) do use nontransitional processing
* nontransitional processing is the desired end state

it seems reasonable to me to change the `"golang.org/x/net/idna".Lookup` profile default to use nontransitional processing.

Marking this as a proposal.

cc @FiloSottile for possible security considerations.

--- Comment #6 by FiloSottile ---
I wouldn’t go as far as calling the current behavior a security vulnerability, but unexpected and spec-divergent behavior is a security liability, so I generally support the change.

This fits in a pattern of implementation choices that haven’t kept up with the changing ecosystem, to the point of becoming dangerously idiosyncratic (like most recently semicolons in URL queries). We don’t have an exception for them in the Compatibility Promise, but maybe we should discuss adding one to ensure the Go standard library doesn’t become riddled with legacy surprising behaviors.

By the way, if we make this change, we should document not only the new behavior but also how it will change and will be kept up to date.

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
What is Chrome's rationale for not making this change?


--- Comment #8 by favonia ---
> What is Chrome's rationale for not making this change?

FYI: There have been multiple issues on Chromium over the years about transitional v.s. non-transitional processings. The latest issue (that was not merged, blocked, or closed) is <https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=694157> There was an older one closed as WONTFIX: <https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=505262>

--- Comment #9 by neild ---
I have not been able to find a conclusive rationale for Chrome not making this change. That doesn't mean there isn't one, of course, just that I can't find it.

So far as I can tell, the primary concern that led to the introduction of transitional processing is that the case-insensitivity of domain names introduces an ambiguity: Uppercase `ß` is `SS`, so uppercasing `straße.de` and `strasse.de` ambiguously produce `STRASSE.DE`.

Of course, the current situation is that lowercase `straße.de` produces ambiguous results depending on which HTTP client you use, so avoiding ambiguity entirely does not presently appear to be an option.

> By the way, if we make this change, we should document not only the new behavior but also how it will change and will be kept up to date.

We currently document that the `idna.Lookup` and `idna.Display` profiles may change over time, so I believe that a change to nontransitional processing would be within the scope of our documented compatibility promises.

I don't know what a good policy for future changes would be. It seems to me that the lack of a clearly correct policy has led to the current fragmentation between browsers. A simple and clear one for us would be to defer the decision to some other party--e.g., always do what Chrome does by default.

--- Comment #10 by rsc ---
Agreeing with Chrome carries a lot of weight with me. 
If Chrome is using this behavior, it can't be _that_ much of a security hole.


--- Comment #11 by domenic ---
In case it helps, the Chrome team considers the current behavior (and any other misalignments with the URL Standard) to be a bug. You can track our meta-bug for this effort at https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=660384.

--- Comment #12 by rsc ---
Considering it a bug and considering it appropriate to change are clearly two different things, and it appears that for now at least Chrome does not consider it appropriate to change. The specific issue for nontransitional IDNA seems to be https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=694157. 

I'm still reluctant to make the change before Chrome. There must be a reason they haven't done it yet.


--- Comment #13 by domenic ---
The reason is engineering resources. (Perhaps I wasn't clear; I'm a member of the Chrome team.)

--- Comment #14 by rsc ---
> The reason is engineering resources. (Perhaps I wasn't clear; I'm a member of the Chrome team.)

Understood, but why is the change costly in engineering resources? It should be something like a 1-line change, no?
I'm trying to get at what the underlying impact or cost is that is keeping Chrome from doing this.
Presumably there is worry about changing behavior in various cases, subtle bugs, and so on?


--- Comment #15 by rsc ---
@domenic is there a planned Chrome milestone when a conversion will happen?
Are there any concerns about breaking users by making the change?


--- Comment #16 by domenic ---
There is no planned milestone; as I said this is not something we're devoting engineering resources to.

There's no significant concern about the change since we would be matching Safari and the spec.

--- Comment #17 by rsc ---
Thanks @domenic. If there's no significant concern then maybe we should just make the change. 
Any objections to doing that?


--- Comment #18 by rsc ---
This sounds like a likely accept, implemented by also accepting and implementing #47510 (changing the default).


--- Comment #19 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #20 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #21 by TimothyGu ---
This is blocked by #30940. We cannot properly choose between transitional/nontransitional right now.

--- Comment #22 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/359634 mentions this issue: `internal/export/idna: use nontransitional processing in Go 1.18`

--- Comment #23 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/360381 mentions this issue: `idna: update from x/text`

--- Comment #24 by TimothyGu ---
This has been fixed in 77c473f4197b5ad4d90689d665534e598f3c0750.

--- Comment #25 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/366955 mentions this issue: `doc/go1.18: add net/http IDNA change`

--- Comment #26 by gopherbot ---
Change https://go.dev/cl/389955 mentions this issue: `_content/doc/go1.18: mention net/http IDNA change`
