=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU4OTgxMDI5NjE= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/46303

==== [Issue Title] ====
x/crypto/acme: allow setting client KID directly

==== [Issue Body] ====
### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
$ go version
go version go1.13.4 linux/amd64
</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?

Yes

### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?

N/A

### What did you do?

I have a service that uses `acme.Client` for communication with an RFC8555 CA. For technical reasons I need to reconstruct the `acme.Client` multiple times during the full flow.

Current implementation works overall, but I'd like to be able to specify `account KID` (equal to `Account.URI`) explicitly, instead of having the library always call the CA's account registration endpoint to obtain kid to cache: https://github.com/golang/crypto/blob/c07d793c2f9aacf728fe68cbd7acd73adbd04159/acme/acme.go#L152

### What did you expect to see?

I'd like to be able to create the client like this:
```
&acme.Client{
    Key:          signer,
    KID:          accountURI,
    DirectoryURL: directoryUrl,
    HTTPClient:   &http.Client{...}
},
```

And have the `kid` [field](https://github.com/golang/crypto/blob/c07d793c2f9aacf728fe68cbd7acd73adbd04159/acme/acme.go#L128) populated from it , e.g.: 
* `KID` field could be a string, only used in the first request to pre-populate the private mutex-protected `kid` value.
*  The following snippet could be added to `accountKID` function [between lines 151 and 152](https://github.com/golang/crypto/blob/c07d793c2f9aacf728fe68cbd7acd73adbd04159/acme/acme.go#L151-L152)

```
if c.KID != "" {	
  c.kid = c.KID
  return c.kid
}
```

### What did you see instead?

I have to specify the client like this:

```
&acme.Client{
    Key:          signer,
    DirectoryURL: directoryUrl,
    HTTPClient: &http.Client{...}
},
```

And then the library calls the CA's account registration endpoint to obtain `kid` to cache. This  results in a lot of unnecessary calls to the CA.


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/354697 mentions this issue: `acme: expose Client KID field`

--- Comment #2 by rolandshoemaker ---
(sent a CL for this, but just to articulate my thoughts here) This seems reasonable to me. I don't think adding a duplicate public field is worth the extra complexity, seems fine to just expose the existing `kid` field.

--- Comment #3 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #4 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group

