=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU5MTAwMTc5NzU= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/46533

==== [Issue Title] ====
cmd/vet: report strings.Trim/TrimLeft/TrimRight with duplicate runes in cutset

==== [Issue Body] ====
`go vet` should ideally report likely misuses of standard library functions especially when it comes to providing constant(-ish) string arguments, e.g. (note: the following list is absolutely not exhaustive)

- `strings.(Trim|TrimLeft|TrimRight)` with a [`cutset` containing duplicated runes](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/46446#issuecomment-851767418)
- `net/http.NewRequest` with an invalid HTTP `method` or a non-HTTP `url`
- `net/http.(Do|Get|Post)` with a non-HTTP `url`
- `regexp.(Must)?Compile` with an invalid `regexp`
- `(text|html)/template.Template.Parse` with an invalid template `text`
- (and so on, for all functions/structs where it makes sense; not all of them need to be added right away, coverage will likely improve over time)



==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by jfesler ---
I especially like the regexp.MustCompile example, consider it panics. And I see people using this function in places that may or may not be observed in testing. Code reviews help guard against this; but the reviewers are unfortunately human.

--- Comment #2 by mvdan ---
Would this qualify for the "frequency" factor of vet checks? How often do these issues occur?

It's also worth noting that @dominikh's staticcheck has had some of these for a while, like https://staticcheck.io/docs/checks#SA1000.

--- Comment #3 by dominikh ---
> net/http.NewRequest with an invalid HTTP method

I believe there's nothing stopping a server from offering non-standard methods, so this could cause false positives.

>  or a non-HTTP url

With custom transports that could also lead to false positives.

--- Comment #4 by guodongli-google ---
One question is whether we should use one checker to check all these cases or one checker for each API. 
StaticCheck has some related or similar checks, e.g.

- [A string cutset contains duplicate characters](https://staticcheck.io/docs/checks#SA1024)
- [Invalid format in `time.Parse`](https://staticcheck.io/docs/checks#SA1002)
- [Invalid URL in `net/url.Parse`](https://staticcheck.io/docs/checks#SA1007)
- [Invalid argument in call to a `strconv` function](https://staticcheck.io/docs/checks#SA1030)
- [Invalid first argument to `exec.Command`](https://staticcheck.io/docs/checks#SA1005)

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #6 by rsc ---
Vet mostly stays away from the standard library. It does check Printf (in fact that's what vet was created for). 
But Printf is far more core to the use of Go than, say, templates, or even regular expressions.
It also seems weird to put more of these library-specific checks in that are not really available to third-party libraries.
(Again, Printf is an exception, but we may not want to add more.)


--- Comment #7 by CAFxX ---
If this is the direction of the `vet` tool, then sure. 

In this case though, just a few notes:

- The `vet` tool description should really be clarified. As it is right now, it makes it sound like `vet` is the correct place for this kind of checks, because it uses an example to describe what the tool does, and that example is *precisely* validating arguments to standard library functions: ["Vet examines Go source code and reports suspicious constructs, *such as Printf calls whose arguments do not align with the format string.*"](https://github.com/golang/go/blob/460900a7b51f917888cb17608367979243178fe1/src/cmd/vet/doc.go) and ["Vet is a tool that checks correctness of Go programs. It runs a suite of tests, each tailored to check for a particular class of errors. Examples include *incorrect Printf format verbs* and malformed build tags."](https://github.com/golang/go/blob/460900a7b51f917888cb17608367979243178fe1/src/cmd/vet/README#L1-L3)
- The [`vet` README](https://github.com/golang/go/blob/460900a7b51f917888cb17608367979243178fe1/src/cmd/vet/README#L6-L33) contains helpful criteria for inclusions, but they do not mention those you mentioned (not really supposed to cover the standard library, checks should be available to third-party libraries). Maybe the criteria would benefit from an update?
- Specifically about the checks not being available to third-party libraries... isn't this an implementation detail? (in that it would seem to be enough to have the analysis live in https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/tools/go/analysis, where again it [sounds like it would belong](https://cs.opensource.google/go/x/tools/+/master:go/analysis/doc.go;l=13-18;drc=92778473c2e66cce9cca86de3a98d22b1c550dea)). (Or am I misunderstanding what you meant there?)
- As a personal opinion though, let me share that I do not really follow the rationale for not considering `vet` the correct place for checks involving (mis)uses of the standard library. It is definitely not intuitive why that would be the case, given that the standard library can not be really considered "not being part of go" (from the point of view of the spec, maybe, but I would argue that the fraction of Go programs and developers that rely exclusively on the spec and not on the standard library is rather small).
Indeed, this criterion is somewhat undermined by the impression that a significant number of the existing `vet` checks (almost half?) are actually about various types of standard library misuse (`atomic`, `copylocks`, `httpresponse`, `lostcancel`, `printf`, `stdmethods`, `structtag`, `tests`, `unmarshal`, `unsafeptr`). While it's undoubtedly true that the kind of each one of these tests may differ, AFAICT they share in their nature of being about *some* semantic aspect of the standard library.

--- Comment #8 by timothy-king ---
>  Indeed, this criterion is somewhat undermined by the impression that a significant number of the existing vet checks (almost half?) are actually about various types of standard library misuse (atomic, copylocks, httpresponse, lostcancel, printf, stdmethods, structtag, tests, unmarshal, unsafeptr).

You can also included `atomicalign`, `deepequalerrors `, `errorsas`, and `sortslice `. 

> Vet mostly stays away from the standard library. 

I am not following this claim either given the precedent for including checks against the standard library within vet.

> But Printf is far more core to the use of Go than, say, templates, or even regular expressions.

Does "core"-ness come down to just the "frequency" requirement of vet?

Anyhow my preference would be to have 4 discussions: duplicates in string cutsets, regexg.MustCompile, non-http urls, and invalid template text. I think combining these 4 cases is distracting. Each case will have a different frequency concern. @dominikh brought up false positives for one of the cases that does not apply to the others. I also not sure if constant-ish is interesting for all of these cases (or what constant-ish means). For example, it is not clear whether we should check regexp.MustCompile for invalid constant prefixes with variable suffices. (That seems complicated for not much gain compared to an inferred constant value.) There might be enough underlying similarities that grouping them would help justify creating a new checker? Say in aggregate they are frequent enough, but not individually?

--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
It's hard to tell exactly where the line is, but http.Do/Get/Post, regexp.Compile, text/template.Parse all return errors that users are expected to check. It doesn't seem like vet needs to repeat these, and it _really_ doesn't seem like vet should link in the template parser.

The http.NewRequest example is an incorrect check, since non-HTTP methods are permitted (and it returns an error anyway).

The strings.Trim examples may be worth adding. They are clear errors, and it comes up more often than we'd like because people confuse Trim/TrimLeft for TrimPrefix and TrimRight for TrimSuffix. The check wouldn't catch all such cases, but it could catch some. If someone has any data on how often that happens, we could narrow the issue to that check.



--- Comment #10 by rsc ---
Based on the discussion, retitled to be only about strings.Trim/TrimLeft/TrimRight, detecting something like `strings.TrimLeft(s, "http://")` that really wants strings.TrimPrefix.


--- Comment #11 by timothy-king ---
In case @rsc's example is not obvious enough, `strings.TrimLeft(s, "http://")` has a cutset with duplicate runes `{"t", "/"}`. So a duplicate rune detector would catch this. I find this example fairly persuasive.

--- Comment #12 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #13 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #14 by nightlyone ---
Could the implemented analysis extended by suggesting the 2 possible fixes (remove the duplicate rune or replace the TrimLeft/TrimRight with TrimPrefix/TrimSuffix?

Complaining is cheap, but offering solutions is better 😉

--- Comment #15 by cespare ---
@nightlyone this bug strongly implies a misunderstanding of what `TrimLeft`/`TrimRight` do, so suggesting a "fix" where we remove the duplicate runes seems like a mistake.

--- Comment #16 by timothy-king ---
@nightlyone We first need to decide that we want to. @cespare's point is a good one and I am not confident about if/when we should be suggesting a fixes in this case. The proposal is for this checker to make it to cmd/vet which has cautious ["Precision"](https://cs.opensource.google/go/go/+/refs/tags/go1.17:src/cmd/vet/README;l=25) requirements.

IMO extending the Analyzer to propose these fixes in the future given the current CL would not be that big of a deal.

FWIW there also seems to be some controversy about suggesting multiple fixes: https://cs.opensource.google/go/x/tools/+/refs/tags/v0.1.5:go/analysis/diagnostic.go;l=23-28 . But this discussion is probably better in a different venue (such as a new bug).

--- Comment #17 by robpike ---
I'm not comfortable with this one. It's a lucky accident that a duplicated rune catches a string where TrimPrefix was the right thing to call. I'd rather put this on hold until a more predictable method is discovered.

According to the vet README, this one fails the "precision" rule.

--- Comment #18 by timothy-king ---
I ran the Go checker in the [CL](https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/tools/+/343670) across a large % of the Google monorepo Go code.

I took a look at the reports. IMO there were not rally any false positives. Each report indicated some confusion about what Trim, TrimLeft, or TrimRight does and were . Here is roughly the breakdown:
1. The bulk of these were url processing examples that I think are clearly mistaking TrimLeft/TrimRight for TrimPrefix/TrimSuffix, e.g. "/var/", "http://", "__foo_bar", "git::", etc. This was about ~80% of the reports in this experiment. 
2.  "strings.Trim(s, `\n\t`)" - this is because of the '`'. This is quite likely to be a bug as they are not capturing the runes they intended.
3. `strings.Trim(s, "//")` - given the context these were probably also just variants of url processing, but I am less confident.
4. Using `strings.Trim(s, "''")` to transform strings like "'GET'" into "GET". There might be enough domain in this case that they were doing the right thing.

That final case was maybe a style issue. The duplicate does suggest that they are probably confused about the API though.

--- Comment #19 by timothy-king ---
> According to the vet README, this one fails the "precision" rule.

@robpike I am not sure I understand what part of the precision rule this fails. Can you elaborate?

--- Comment #20 by robpike ---
@timothy-king The existence of multiple characters does not necessarily mean that TrimPrefix is needed. It may be a mistake, but it may be harmless. 

The original idea to check ordering would be more precise, although still not perfect. I feel what you have proposed feels good primarily because it catches "http". But it won't catch other things that are just as incorrect, such as "such as".

The goal is imprecise, the suggested fix imprecise. This is not a top-level change to vet.

--- Comment #21 by timothy-king ---
@robpike I am not sure there is ever a good reason to have duplicates in the cutset, whether it is benign or not. It is a fairly strong indication that the user does not understand the function. So far I have not seen good in-the-wild evidence of false positives or bad advice.

If the concern is false negatives (not catching "/etc"), I think it is reasonable to accept having some false negatives as long as we are clear about what is happening so users do not use this as a crutch.

If the concern is that the documentation for the analyzer is being a bit too suggestive that the problem is TrimPrefix/TrimSuffix, I am happy to adjust this.

Maybe @rsc can give advice on the path forward if you feel the proposal should not have been accepted.

FWIW duplicates would alert on "such as". There are two "s" runes. It would also alert on "exempli gratia" and "e.g.", but not on "eg".

--- Comment #22 by rsc ---
The concern here seems to be not as much about precision (too many false positives) as recall (too many false negatives): perhaps  Talked to @taking and he is going to try to get some data about false negative rate. This also has a bearing on #47822. It may be that duplicates have too high a false negative rate but that 'duplicates or limited unsorted' is OK, where 'limited unsorted' means checking just that ABC..Z, abc..z, and 123..9 appear sorted, and not worry about whether " \t\r\n" is sorted, whatever that means.

