=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU5MjI5MzYyMTI= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/46787

==== [Issue Title] ====
runtime: provide Pinner API for object pinning

==== [Issue Body] ====
**Update**, 2021-10-20: the latest proposal is the API in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/46787#issuecomment-942547949.

- - - 

## Problem Statement

The [pointer passing rules](https://golang.org/cmd/cgo/#hdr-Passing_pointers) state:

> Go code may pass a Go pointer to C provided the Go memory to which it points does not contain any Go pointers. 

and
> Go code may not store a Go pointer in C memory.

There are C APIs, most notably the `iovec` based ones for [vectored I/O](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vectored_I/O) which expect an array of structs that describe buffers to read to or write from. The naive approach would be to allocate both the array and the buffers with `C.malloc()` and then either work on the C buffers directly or copy the content to Go buffers. In the case of Go bindings for a C API, which is assumably the most common use case for Cgo, the users of the bindings shouldn't have to deal with C types, which means that all data has to be copied into Go allocated buffers. This of course impairs the performance, especially for larger buffers. Therefore it would be desirable to have a safe possibility to let the C API write directly into the Go buffers. This, however, is not possible because

* either the buffer array is allocated in C memory, but then the pointers of the Go buffers can't be stored in it. (Storing Go pointers in C memory is forbidden.)
* or the buffer array is allocated in Go memory and the Go buffer pointers are stored in it. But then the pointer to that buffer array can't be passed  to a C function. (Passing a Go pointer that points to memory containing other Go pointers to a C function is forbidden.)

Obviously, what is missing is a safe way to pin an arbitrary number of Go pointers in order to store them in C memory or in passed-to-C Go memory for the duration of a C call.
 
## Workarounds

### Break the rules and store the Go pointer in C memory
<details><summary>(click)</summary>

with something like

```go
IovecCPtr.iov_base = unsafe.Pointer(myGoPtr)
```

but `GODEBUG=cgocheck=2` would catch that.

However, you can circumvent cgocheck=2 with this casting trick: 

```go
*(*uintptr)(unsafe.Pointer(&IovecCPtr.iov_base)) = uintptr(myGoPtr)
```
This might work, as long as the GC is not moving the pointers, which might be a fact as of now, but is not guaranteed. 

</details>

### Break the rules and hide the Go pointer in  Go memory
<details><summary>(click)</summary>

with something like
```go
type iovecT struct {
  iov_base uintptr
  iov_len  C.size_t
}
iovec := make([]iovecT, numberOfBuffers)
for i := range iovec {
  bufferPtr := unsafe.Pointer(&bufferArray[i][0])
  iovec[i].iov_base = uintptr(bufferPtr)
  iovec[i].iov_len = C.size_t(len(bufferArray[i]))
}
n := C.my_iovec_read((*C.struct_iovec)(unsafe.Pointer(&iovec[0])), C.int(numberOfBuffers))
```

Again: This might work, as long as the GC is not moving the pointers. `GODEBUG=cgocheck=2` wouldn't complain about this.

</details>

### Break the rules and temporarily disable `cgocheck`
<details><summary>(click)</summary>

If hiding the Go pointer as a uintptr like in the last workaround is not possible, passing Go memory that contains Go pointers usually bails out because of the default `cgocheck=1` setting. It is possible to disable temporarily `cgocheck` during a C call, which can especially useful, when the pointer have been "pinned" with one of the later workarounds. For example the `_cgoCheckPtr()` function, that is used in the generated Cgo code, can be  shadowed in the local scope, which disables the check for the following C calls in the scope:

```go
func ... {
  _cgoCheckPointer := func(interface{}, interface{}) {}
  C.my_c_function(x, y)
}
```

Maybe slightly more robust, is to export the runtime.dbgvars list:

```go
type dbgVar struct {
	name  string
	value *int32
}

//go:linkname dbgvars runtime.dbgvars
var dbgvars []dbgVar

var cgocheck = func() *int32 {
	for i := range dbgvars {
		if dbgvars[i].name == "cgocheck" {
			return dbgvars[i].value
		}
	}
	panic("Couln't find cgocheck debug variable")
}()

func ... {
	before := *cgocheck
	*cgocheck = 0
	C.my_c_function(x, y)
	*cgocheck = before
}
```

</details>

### Use a C function to store the Go pointer in C memory
<details><summary>(click)</summary>

The rules allow that a C function stores a Go pointer in C memory for the duration of the call. So, for each Go pointer a C function can be called in a Go routine, that stores the Go pointer in C memory and then calls a Go function callback that waits for a release signal. After the release signal is received, the Go callback returns to the C function, the C function clears the C memory from the Go pointer, and returns as well, finishing the Go routine.

This approach fully complies with the rules, but is quite expensive, because each Go routine that calls a C function creates a new thread, that means one thread per stored Go pointer.

</details>

### Use the `//go:uintptrescapes` compiler directive
<details><summary>(click)</summary>

`//go:uintptrescapes` is a compiler directive that

> specifies that the function's uintptr arguments may be pointer values that have been converted to uintptr and must be treated as such by the garbage collector.

So, similar to the workaround before, a Go function with this directive can be called in a Go routine, which simply waits for a release signal. When the signal is received, the function returns and sets the pointer free.

This seems already almost like a proper solution, so that I implemented a package with this approach, that allows to `Pin()` a Go pointer and `Poke()` it into C memory: [PtrGuard](https://github.com/ansiwen/ptrguard)

But there are still caveats. The compiler and the runtime (cgocheck=2) don't seem to know about which pointers are protected by the directive, because they still don't allow to pass Go memory containing these Go pointers to a C function, or to store the pointers in C memory. Therefore the two first workarounds are additionally necessary. Also there is the small overhead for the Go routine and the release signalling.

</details>

## Proposal

It would make Cgo a lot more usable for C APIs with more complex pointer handling like `iovec`, if there would be a programmatic way to provide what `//go:uintptrescapes` provides already through the backdoor. There should be a possibility to pin an arbitrary amount of Go pointers in the current scope, so that they are allowed to be stored in C memory or be contained in Go memory that is passed to a C function within this scope, for example with a `runtime.PtrEscapes()` function. It's cumbersome, that it's required to abuse Go routines, channels and casting tricks in order provide bindings to such C APIs. As long as the Go GC is not moving pointers, it could be a trivial implementation, but it would encapsulate this knowledge and would give users a guarantee.

I know from the other issues and discussions around this topic that it's seen as dangerous if it is possible to pin an arbitrary amount of pointers. But

1. it is possible to call an arbitrary amount of C or `//go:uintptrescapes` functions, therefore it is also possible to pin arbitrary amount of Go pointers already.
2. it is necessary for some C APIs

Related issues: #32115, #40431

/cc @ianlancetaylor @rsc @seebs 

**edit:** the first workaround had an incorrect statement.
**edit 2:** add workarounds for disabling cgocheck

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by DeedleFake ---
From what I can tell from the documentation for the new [`cgo.Handle`](https://tip.golang.org/pkg/runtime/cgo/#Handle), it's intended only for a situation where a pointer needs to be passed from Go to C and then back to Go without the C code doing anything with what it points to. As it passes a handle ID, not a real pointer, the C code can't actually get access to the actual data. ~~Maybe a function could be provided on the C side that takes a handle ID and returns the original pointer, thus allowing the C code to access the data? Would that solve this issue?~~

Edit: Wait, that doesn't make sense. Could you just use `Handle` to make sure that it's held onto? Could the definition of `Handle` be extended to mean that the pointer itself is valid for the duration of the `Handle`'s existence? In other words, this would be defined to be valid:

```go
// void doSomethingWithAPointer(int *a);
import "C"

func main() {
  v := C.int(3)
  h := cgo.NewHandle(&v)
  doSomethingWithAPointer(&v) // Safe because the handle exists for that pointer.
  h.Delete()
}
```

Alternatively, if that's not feasible, what about a method on `Handle` that returns a valid pointer for the given value?

```go
// Pointer returns a C pointer that points to the underlying value of the handle
// and is valid for the life of the handle.
func (h Handle) Pointer() C.uintptr_t
```

Disclaimer: I'm not familiar enough with the internals of either the Go garbage collector or Cgo to know if either of these even make sense.

--- Comment #2 by ansiwen ---
@DeedleFake As you pointed out yourself, the `cgo.Handle` has a very different purpose. It's just a registry for a map from a C compatible arbitrary ID (`uintptr`) to an arbitrary Go value. It's purpose is to _refer_ to a Go value in the C world, not to access it from there. It doesn't affect the behavior of the garbage collector, which could still freely move around the values in the Handle map, and would never delete them, since they are referenced by the map.

--- Comment #3 by ianlancetaylor ---
An big advantage of the current cgo mechanisms, including `go:uintptrescapes`, is that the pointers are automatically unpinned when the cgo function returns.  As far as I can see you didn't propose any particular mechanism for pinning pointers, but it would be very desirable to somehow ensure that the pointers are unpinned.  Otherwise code could easily get into scenarios in which pointers remain pinned forever, which if Go ever implements a full moving garbage collector will cause the garbage collector to silently behave quite poorly.  In other words, some APIs that could solve this problem will be be footguns: code that can easily cause a program to silently behave badly in ways that will be very hard to detect.

It's hard to say more without a specific API to discuss.  If you suggested one, my apologies for missing it.

--- Comment #4 by ansiwen ---
@ianlancetaylor thanks for taking the time to answer.

> An big advantage of the current cgo mechanisms, including `go:uintptrescapes`, is that the pointers are automatically unpinned when the cgo function returns.

I agree, that is an advantage. However, with go routines it's trivial to fire-and-forget thousands of such function calls, that never return.

> As far as I can see you didn't propose any particular mechanism for pinning pointers, but it would be very desirable to somehow ensure that the pointers are unpinned. Otherwise code could easily get into scenarios in which pointers remain pinned forever, which if Go ever implements a full moving garbage collector will cause the garbage collector to silently behave quite poorly. In other words, some APIs that could solve this problem will be be footguns: code that can easily cause a program to silently behave badly in ways that will be very hard to detect.

I didn't describe a specific API, that's true. I hoped that this could be developed here together once we agreed on the requirements. One of the requirements that I mentioned was, that the pinning happens only for the current scope. That implies automatic unpinning when the scope is left. Sorry that I didn't make that clear enough. So, to rephrase more compactly, the requirements would be:

* possibility to pin pointers in the current scope (exactly as if they would be the argument of a C function call)
* automatic unpinning when the current scope is left (the current function returns)
* cgocheck knows about the pinning and does not complain

> It's hard to say more without a specific API to discuss. If you suggested one, my apologies for missing it.

As stated above, I didn't want to suggest a specific API, but characteristics of it. In the end it could be a function like `runtime.PtrEscapes(unsafe.Pointer)`. The usage could look like this:

```go
func ReadFileIntoBufferArray(f *os.File, bufferArray [][]byte) int {
  numberOfBuffers := len(bufferArray)

  iovec := make([]C.struct_iovec, numberOfBuffers)

  for i := range iovec {
    bufferPtr := unsafe.Pointer(&bufferArray[i][0])
    runtime.PtrEscapes(bufferPtr) // <- pins the pointer and makes it known to escape to C
    iovec[i].iov_base = bufferPtr
    iovec[i].iov_len = C.size_t(len(bufferArray[i]))
  }

  n := C.readv(C.int(f.Fd()), &iovec[0], C.int(numberOfBuffers))
  // ^^^ cgocheck doesn't complain, because Go pointers in iovec are pinned
  return int(n) // <- all pinned pointers in iovec are unpinned
}
```

As long as the GC is not moving, `runtime.PtrEscapes()` is almost a no-op, it would basically only tell cgocheck not to bail out for these pointers. But users would have a guarantee, that if the GC becomes moving later, this function will take care of it.

Regarding footguns I'm pretty sure, that the workarounds, that have to be used at the moment to solve these problems, will cause more "programs to silently behave badly" than the potential abuse of a proper pinning method.

--- Comment #5 by bcmills ---
> it would be very desirable to somehow ensure that the pointers are unpinned

Drawing from `runtime.KeepAlive`, one possibility might be something like:
```go
package runtime

// Pin prevents the object to which p points from being relocated until
// the returned PointerPin either is unpinned or becomes unreachable.
func Pin[T any](p *T) PointerPin

type PointerPin struct {…}
func (p PointerPin) Unpin() {}
```

Then the example might look like:
```go
func ReadFileIntoBufferArray(f *os.File, bufferArray [][]byte) int {
	numberOfBuffers := len(bufferArray)

	iovec := make([]C.struct_iovec, numberOfBuffers)

	for i := range iovec {
		bufferPtr := unsafe.Pointer(&bufferArray[i][0])
		defer runtime.Pin(bufferPtr).Unpin()
		iovec[i].iov_base = bufferPtr
		iovec[i].iov_len = C.size_t(len(bufferArray[i]))
	}

	n := C.readv(C.int(f.Fd()), &iovec[0], C.int(numberOfBuffers))
	return int(n)
}
```

A `vet` warning could verify that the result of `runtime.Pin` is used, to ensure that it is not accidentally released too early (see also #20803).

--- Comment #6 by phlogistonjohn ---
@ansiwen when you write "automatic unpinning when the current scope is left (the current function returns)" the current scope you refer to is the scope of the Go function correct? In your example that would be `ReadFileIntoBufferArray`.
I'm trying to double check what the behavior would be regarding if we needed to make multiple calls into C using the same pointer.

@bcmills version also looks very natural flowing to me, and in that version it's clear that the pointer would be pinned until the defer at the end of `ReadFileIntoBufferArray`.

--- Comment #7 by ansiwen ---
> @ansiwen when you write "automatic unpinning when the current scope is left (the current function returns)" the current scope you refer to is the scope of the Go function correct? In your example that would be `ReadFileIntoBufferArray`.

@phlogistonjohn Yes, exactly.

> @bcmills version also looks very natural flowing to me, and in that version it's clear that the pointer would be pinned until the defer at the end of `ReadFileIntoBufferArray`.

Yes, I also would prefer @bcmills version from a user's perspective, because it's more explicit and it's basically the same API that we use with [PtrGuard](https://github.com/ansiwen/ptrguard).

I just don't know enough about the implications on the implementation side and effects on the Go internals, so I don't know what API would be more feasible. My proposal is about providing an official way to solve the described problem. I really don't care so much about the "form", that is how exactly the API looks like. Whatever works best with the current Go and Cgo implementation. 😊

--- Comment #8 by ansiwen ---
@bcmills I guess, an argument @ianlancetaylor might bring up against your API proposal is, that it would allow to store the `PointerPin` value in a variable and keep them pinned for an unlimited time, so it would _not_  "ensure that the pointers are unpinned". If the unpinning is implicit, it is more comparable to `//go:uintptrescapes`.

--- Comment #9 by ansiwen ---
@ianlancetaylor 
> it would be very desirable to somehow ensure that the pointers are unpinned.

So, if you want to enforce the unpinning, the only strict RAII pattern in Go that I could come up with is using a scoped constructor like this API:

```go
package runtime

// Pinner is the context for pinning pointers with Pin()
// can't be copied or constructed outside a Pinner scope
type Pinner struct {…}

// Pin prevents the object to which p points from being relocated until
// Pinner becomes invalid.
func (Pinner) Pin(p unsafe.Pointer) {...}

func WithPinner(func(Pinner)) {...}
```

which would be used like this:

```go
func ReadFileIntoBufferArray(f *os.File, bufferArray [][]byte) int {
    numberOfBuffers := len(bufferArray)
    
    iovec := make([]C.struct_iovec, numberOfBuffers)

    var n C.ssize_t
    runtime.WithPinner(func (pinner runtime.Pinner) {
        for i := range iovec {
            bufferPtr := unsafe.Pointer(&bufferArray[i][0])
            pinner.Pin(bufferPtr)
            iovec[i].iov_base = bufferPtr
            iovec[i].iov_len = C.size_t(len(bufferArray[i]))
        }
        
        n = C.readv(C.int(f.Fd()), &iovec[0], C.int(numberOfBuffers))
    }) // <- All pinned pointers are released here and pinner is invalidated (in case it's copied out of scope).
    return int(n)
}
```

I personally would prefer a thinner API, where either it must be explicitly unpinned, like in the proposal of @bcmills, or - even better - the pinning _implicitly_ creates a defer for the scope in which the pinning function has been called from. Given, that this will be implemented in the runtime package, I guess there are tricks and magic that can be used there.


--- Comment #10 by Merovius ---
@ansiwen Even with the `func` API you suggest, a user might store the argument in a closed-over variable, to have it survive the function. In general, as long as the pin is represented by some value, we can't prevent that value from being kept around. So I don't think your version has significant safety-benefits as to compared to @bcmills, while being less wieldy and also potentially heavier in runtime cost (the closure might make it easier for things to escape).

Personally, as long as the `PointerPin` has to be intentionally kept around, I think that's fine. I think the suggestion to unpin when the `PointerPin` becomes unreachable already makes it sufficiently hard to shoot yourself in the foot to tolerate the risk. And we might be able to use `go vet` for additional safety (like warning if the result of `Pin` is assigned to a global var or something).

--- Comment #11 by ansiwen ---
@Merovius 
> @ansiwen Even with the `func` API you suggest, a user might store the argument in a closed-over variable, to have it survive the function. In general, as long as the pin is represented by some value, we can't prevent that value from being kept around. So I don't think your version has significant safety-benefits as to compared to @bcmills, while being less wieldy and also potentially heavier in runtime cost (the closure might make it easier for things to escape).

The "keeping-around" can easily be prevented by one pointer indirection that get's invalidated when the scope is left. You can have a look at my implementation of [PtrGuard](https://github.com/ansiwen/ptrguard) that even has test case for exactly the case of a scope escaping variable.

> Personally, as long as the `PointerPin` has to be intentionally kept around, I think that's fine. I think the suggestion to unpin when the `PointerPin` becomes unreachable already makes it sufficiently hard to shoot yourself in the foot to tolerate the risk. And we might be able to use `go vet` for additional safety (like warning if the result of `Pin` is assigned to a global var or something).

Yeah, I agree, as I wrote before, I'm totally fine with both. It's just something I came up with to address @ianlancetaylor's concerns. I also think that the risks are "manageable", there are all kinds of other risks when dealing with runtime and/or unsafe packages after all.

--- Comment #12 by beoran ---
I think that the API proposed by @bcmills is the most useful one. Although there is a risk of forgetting to unpin a pointer, once Go gets a moving garby collector, for certain low level uses,  certain blocks of memory will have to stay pinned for the duration of the program. Certainly for system calls in Linux, such as for the frame buffers. In other words, Pin and Unpin are also useful without cgo.

--- Comment #13 by hnes ---
Hi @rsc, any updates on this issue recently? I noticed it has been several days after the [2021-08-04](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/33502#issuecomment-892868646)'s review meeting minutes.

--- Comment #14 by rsc ---
The compiler/runtime team has been talking a bit about this but don't have any clear suggestions yet.

The big problem with pinning is that if we ever want a moving garbage collector in the future, pins will make it much more complex. That's why we've avoided it so far.

/cc @aclements 

--- Comment #15 by ansiwen ---
> The big problem with pinning is that if we ever want a moving garbage collector in the future, pins will make it much more complex. That's why we've avoided it so far.

@rsc But my point in the description was, that we _have_ pinning already when C functions are called with Go pointers or when the  `//go:uintptrescapes` directive is used. So the situation is complex already, isn't it?


--- Comment #16 by beoran ---
@rsc I would say the converse is also true. If you are going to implement a moving garbage collector without support for pinning, that will make it much more complex to use Go for certain direct operating calls without cgo, e.g. on Linux. 
In other words, as @ansiwen says, there's really no way to avoid that complexity. And therefore I think it would be better if Go supported it explicitly than through workarounds.

--- Comment #17 by ianlancetaylor ---
Unbounded pinning has the potential to be significantly worse than bounded pinning.  If people accidentally or intentionally leave many pointers pinned, that can fragment the spaces that the GC uses, and make it very hard for a moving GC to make any progress at all.  This can in principle happen with cgo today, but it is unlikely that many programs pass a bunch of pointers to a cgo function that never returns.  When programmers control the pinning themselves, bugs are more likely.  If the bug is in some imported third party library, the effect will be strange garbage collection behavior for the overall program.  This will be hard to understand and hard to diagnose, and it will be hard to find the root cause.  (One likely effect will be a set of tools similar to the memory profiler that track pinned pointers.)

It's also worth noting that we don't have a moving garbage collector today, so any problems that pinned pointers may introduce for a moving garbage collector will not be seen today.  So if we ever do introduce a moving garbage collector, we will have a flag day of hard-to-diagnose garbage collection problems.  This will make it that much harder to ever change the garbage collector in practice.

So I do not think the current situation is nearly as complex as the situation would be if we add unbounded pinning.  This doesn't mean that we shouldn't add unbounded pinning.  But I think that it does mean that the argument for it has to be something other than "we can already pin pointers today."

--- Comment #18 by beoran ---
@ianlancetaylor That is fair enough. But then it seems to me the best way ahead is to put this issue on hold until we can implement a prototype moving garbage collector.

There is always a workaround if there is no pinning available and that is to manually allocate memory directly from the OS so the GC doesn't know about it. It is not ideal but it can work.

--- Comment #19 by egonelbre ---
Yeah, one workaround that is missing from the discussion is hiding the C api allocation concerns, e.g. iovec could be implemented like:

```
package iovec

type Buffers struct {
	Data [][]byte

	data *C.uint8_t
	list *C.iovecT
}

func NewBuffers(sizes []int) *Buffers {
	...
	// C.malloc everything
	// cast from *C.uint8_t to []byte
}

func (buffers *Buffers) ReadFrom(f *os.File) error { ...
```

Or in other words, from the problem statement, it's unclear why it's required to use `bufferArray [][]byte` as the argument.

--- Comment #20 by ansiwen ---
@ianlancetaylor 
> So I do not think the current situation is nearly as complex as the situation would be if we add unbounded pinning. This doesn't mean that we shouldn't add unbounded pinning. But I think that it does mean that the argument for it has to be something other than "we can already pin pointers today."

Let's separate the two questions "pinning yes/no" and "pinning bounded/unbounded".

#### pinning yes/no
I also proposed 

1. an API that allows bounded pinning (`runtime.WithPinner()`).
2. the potential possibility of a `runtime.Pin()` with no return value and an implicit `defer` that automatically gets unpinned when the current function returns.

Both provide a similar behaviour as the `//go:uintptrescapes` directive, if that is what you mean with "bounded". What do you think of these options?

#### pinning bounded/unbounded

1. when we will have a moving GC, there will always be also a possibility to pin pointer or pause the moving, so this needs to be implemented in any case. Is this correct?
2. when people leave pointers pinned, the GC will behave like a non-moving GC, so there is no regression beyond our current status-quo, right? So, what exactly do you mean with "hard-to-diagnose garbage collection problems"?
3. would the risk of many unpinned pointers not be similar to that of memory leaks, like with global dynamic data structures, that are possible now? I know, memory fragmentation is potentially worse than just allocating memory, but the effect would be similar: OOM errors.

For me personally the first question is more important. Bounded or unbounded, I think the _**existing**_ and _**required**_ ways of pinning should be made less hacky in their usage.

@egonelbre 
> Or in other words, from the problem statement, it's unclear why it's required to use `bufferArray [][]byte` as the argument.

The `bufferArray [][]byte` is just a placeholder for an arbitrary "native Go data structure". As the problem statement mentions, the goal is to avoid copying of the data. Especially vectored I/O is used for big amounts of data, so depending on the use case, you can't choose the target data structure by yourself, but it is provided by another library that you intend to use (let's say video processing for example). That would mean, that in all these cases you have to copy the data from your own C allocated data structure to the Go-allocated target data structure of your library, for no good reason.


--- Comment #21 by ianlancetaylor ---
> when we will have a moving GC, there will always be also a possibility to pin pointer or pause the moving, so this needs to be implemented in any case. Is this correct?

In some manner, yes.

> when people leave pointers pinned, the GC will behave like a non-moving GC, so there is no regression beyond our current status-quo, right? So, what exactly do you mean with "hard-to-diagnose garbage collection problems"?

A GC that is based on moving pointers is not the same as a GC that does not move pointers.  A  GC based on moving pointers may be completely blocked by a pinned pointer, whereas for a non-moving GC a pinned pointer is just the same as a live pointer.

> would the risk of many unpinned pointers not be similar to that of memory leaks, like with global dynamic data structures, that are possible now? I know, memory fragmentation is potentially worse than just allocating memory, but the effect would be similar: OOM errors.

Same answer.

Again, all I am saying is that arguments based on "we already support pinned pointers, so it's OK to add more" are not good arguments.  We need different arguments.

--- Comment #22 by hnes ---
How would we deal with the `iovec` struct during vectored I/O syscall if we have a GC that is based on moving pointers? Maybe the same solution could also be applied to the pointer pinning we are discussing?

> A GC based on moving pointers may be completely blocked by a pinned pointer.

I'm afraid that would badly impact the GC latency or something else if it is true. Please consider the disk i/o syscall that may block a very long time.

--- Comment #23 by ansiwen ---
@ianlancetaylor 
> > when we will have a moving GC, there will always be also a possibility to pin pointer or pause the moving, so this needs to be implemented in any case. Is this correct?
> 
> In some manner, yes.
> 
> > when people leave pointers pinned, the GC will behave like a non-moving GC, so there is no regression beyond our current status-quo, right? So, what exactly do you mean with "hard-to-diagnose garbage collection problems"?
> 
> A GC that is based on moving pointers is not the same as a GC that does not move pointers. A GC based on moving pointers may be completely blocked by a pinned pointer, whereas for a non-moving GC a pinned pointer is just the same as a live pointer.

Since you agreed that the pinning is required in the answer before, I don't understand how such an implementation could be used in Go.

> Again, all I am saying is that arguments based on "we already support pinned pointers, so it's OK to add more" are not good arguments. We need different arguments.

I don't think "add more" is the right wording. It's more about exposing the pinning in a better way. And these are not arguments for _doing_ it, but arguments against the _supposed risks_ of doing it.

The argument for _doing_ it should be clear by now: give people a zero-copy way to use APIs like `iovec` with Go data structures in a future proof way. At the moment, that's not possible.

In your answers you skipped the first part about the bounded pinning. If you have the time to comment on these too, I would be very interested. 😊 


--- Comment #24 by ianlancetaylor ---
> Since you agreed that the pinning is required in the answer before, I don't understand how such an implementation could be used in Go.

The current system for pinning pointers doesn't permit pointers to be pinned indefinitely, if we discount the unusual case of a C function that does not return.

I agree that other systems that somehow ensure that pointers can't be pinned indefinitely are better.  (I don't think that an implicit `defer` is a good approach for Go, though.)

--- Comment #25 by ansiwen ---
Here's another minimalistic API proposal for bounded pinning (basically a programmatic version of the `uintptrescapes` directive):

```go
package runtime

// PtrEscapes prevents the allocated objects referenced by ptrs from being relocated until
// function f returns.
func PtrEscapes(ptrs []unsafe.Pointer, f func())
```

Example:

```go
func ReadFileIntoBufferArray(f *os.File, bufferArray [][]byte) int {
	var buffers []unsafe.Pointer
	numberOfBuffers := len(bufferArray)

	iovec := make([]C.struct_iovec, numberOfBuffers)

	for i := range iovec {
		bufferPtr := unsafe.Pointer(&bufferArray[i][0])
		buffers = append(buffers, bufferPtr)
		iovec[i].iov_base = bufferPtr
		iovec[i].iov_len = C.size_t(len(bufferArray[i]))
	}

	var n C.size_t
	runtime.PtrEscapes(buffers, func() {
		n = C.readv(C.int(f.Fd()), &iovec[0], C.int(numberOfBuffers))
	})
	return int(n)
}
```

--- Comment #26 by rsc ---
I think the main question we need to answer is whether the runtime/GC team wants to commit to any pinning API at all.
/cc @aclements 


--- Comment #27 by bcmills ---
@ianlancetaylor 
> The current system for pinning pointers doesn't permit pointers to be pinned indefinitely, if we discount the unusual case of a C function that does not return.

Is there a reason to believe that we can discount that case today?

I would not be at all surprised to see Go programs that, say, transfer control to a C `main`-like function that then makes callbacks back into Go for certain parts of the program. If I recall correctly, some C GUI toolkits actually require the program to be structured in a very similar way.

--- Comment #28 by prattmic ---
@hnes raised a concrete example in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/46787#issuecomment-903016806: We are primarily discussing `iovec`s, and a `readv`/`writev`/etc could very likely be on a blocking FD and block indefinitely.

--- Comment #29 by randall77 ---
Here's a mini-proposal for a pinning mechanism that avoids some of the downsides mentioned above, particularly the problem of forgetting to unpin any pinned things.

Arguments of cgo calls are pinned for the duration of the call as they are now. In addition, this proposal lets you mark an object as "pinning flow-through" (terrible name, please suggest better ones). If a "pinning flow-through" object is pinned, then any objects it references are also pinned (for the duration of the outer pin). This way, you can't introduce any pinning roots, you can only make the "scope" of pinning during a cgo call larger. All pins when the cgo call returns are effectively dropped.

You would use this, for example, to mark the `[][]byte` object that you pass to `writev` as pinning flow-through. When that `[][]byte` is passed to `writev`, every `[]byte` referenced is also pinned, for the duration of `writev`.

The runtime would keep track of this mark for the lifetime of the object, similar to how we keep track of finalizers currently. You would only need to mark an object once - you could use it many times for many cgo calls.

There would be no way to unmark a pinning flow-through object. (Although we could add such a thing, if people thought it was needed.) The critical feature that makes this proposal better than a raw pinning API is that it doesn't matter if we have lots of objects scattered around the heap marked as pinning flow-through. Only if they are referenced by a root pinning operation (aka used as an argument to a cgo call) do those marks mean anything.

pinning flow-through objects don't pin recursively. Only objects directly referenced from the pinning flow-through object are pinned. If you want deeper pinning, you'd have to mark everything but the leaves of the tree you want pinned.

Possibly having an actual `runtime.SetPinningFlowThrough(object interface{})` API would be overkill, and it could be enough to have a special `//go:` annotation on system calls that would mark arguments as pinning flow-through for the duration of the call. Not sure if that would be enough, or if it would be easier than having an explicit runtime call.


--- Comment #30 by balasanjay ---
Does that work in the io_uring model?

In that model, you write the `[][]byte` to a ring buffer shared with the kernel (effectively). And then you "submit" one or more entries in the ring buffer via a syscall; that syscall will immediately return (or more precisely, when that syscall returns, it doesn't necessarily mean the IOs that were just submitted have completed).

A later submission syscall could indicate to the caller that previously submitted IOs have completed. (It does this _not_ via the mere fact that the syscall returned, but via a separate completion ring buffer shared between the application the kernel that the application has to process)

It feels like the pin might expire too early in your model (i.e. with the next call to `io_uring_submit`, rather than when the application pulls a matching entry from the completion queue ring buffer).
And for that matter, the pin might start too late, because it needs to start before we start writing into the shared ring buffer, not when we invoke the `io_uring_submit` syscall.

(I suppose one option would be for the standard library to offer a higher-level io_uring API, e.g. a blocking `SubmitBatch([]Submissions)` that queues the submissions on an io_uring, waits until those specific completions have been received and then returns from `SubmitBatch`. The compiler would then use `SubmitBatch` as the scope of the pin, rather than a cgo call)
