=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU5Njc1OTE1NTg= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/47658

==== [Issue Title] ====
reflect: add Value.CanInt, CanUint, CanFloat

==== [Issue Body] ====
reflect already has:

* Value.CanAddr / Value.Addr
* Value.CanInterface / Value.Interface
* Value.Int
* Value.Uint
* Value.Float

Those latter three are tedious to use because you need to write:

```go
switch rv.Kind() {
case reflect.Int, reflect.Int8, reflect.Int16, reflect.Int32, reflect.Int64:
    foo(rv.Int())
}
```

I've used up my life quota of typing `reflect.Int, reflect.Int8, reflect.Int16, reflect.Int32, reflect.Int64` (and always forgetting `reflect.Uintptr` in the corresponding usually-copy-pasted `uint` set) and would now prefer to write the proposed `CanFoo` bool methods:

```go
switch {
case rv.CanInt() {
    foo(rv.Int())
case rv.CanUint() {
    foo(rv.Uint())
case rv.CanFloat() {
    foo(rv.Float())
 }
```

Oh, and might as well add CanComplex too for consistency.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by cespare ---
Also more code that will Just Work when we add `int128`.

*(crosses fingers)*

--- Comment #2 by dsnet ---
Counter proposal: Perhaps we should add accessor methods on `reflect.Kind` instead? I feel like `reflect.Value` has enough methods.
```go
func (k reflect.Kind) IsInt()
func (k reflect.Kind) IsUint()
func (k reflect.Kind) IsFloat()
func (k reflect.Kind) IsComplex()
```

--- Comment #3 by bradfitz ---
@cespare, if `int128` is added, we can't make `Value.Int` start returning `int128` instead of `int64`, so making `CanInt` report true for `int128` would be misleading. Likewise, @dsnet, those are fine, but would misleading/insufficient if `int128` were added. I think `CanX` paired with `X` is more explicit and matches `Addr`/`CanAddr` and `Interface`/`CanInterface`.

--- Comment #4 by renthraysk ---
How about a new type for representing a set of Kinds? Something like...

```
type Kinds uint

// Has return true when k is a member of Kinds, false otherwise.
func (s Kinds) Has(k reflect.Kind) bool {
	return (1<<k)&s != 0
}

const (
	Int64Kinds  Kinds = 1<<reflect.Int | 1<<reflect.Int8 | 1<<reflect.Int16 | 1<<reflect.Int32 | 1<<reflect.Int64
	Uint64Kinds Kinds = 1<<reflect.Uint | 1<<reflect.Uint8 | 1<<reflect.Uint16 | 1<<reflect.Uint32 | 1<<reflect.Uint64 | 1<<reflect.Uintptr
)
```

If new types get added, just need to add new constants.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #6 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #7 by dsnet ---
I still prefer methods declared on `reflect.Kind` rather than `reflect.Value` since it's seems broadly more useful. There are times where I have a `reflect.Kind` on hand and I also do logic similar to:
```
case reflect.Int, reflect.Int8, reflect.Int16, reflect.Int32, reflect.Int64:
```

Having methods be declared on `reflect.Value` unfortunately doesn't help these cases.


--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
In the (unlikely? likely?) future where we have int128, Kind.IsInt() would probably return true, but Value.CanInt() would probably return false. It seems like we need the more precise Value.CanInt in this case for deciding whether we are able to call Value.Int.



--- Comment #9 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #10 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/352131 mentions this issue: `reflect: add Value.{CanInt, CanUint, CanFloat, CanComplex}`
