=== Fetching Proposal: I_kwDOAWBuf85BPHaf ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/50447

==== [Issue Title] ====
x/exp/typeparams: a new module with a transitional API for tools

==== [Issue Body] ====
## Background

With Go 1.18, we are adding a large number of new APIs in `go/*` packages such as `go/ast` and `go/types` to represent the new languages features introduced with generics (see proposals #47781 and #47916). Those proposals describe the new types and functions, but do not comprehensively discuss their semantics nor offer guidance on how to update existing tools. Recently, we've updated many tools in `x/tools`, such as `gopls` and `vet` analyzers, and it would be great to share what we learned from that work with the larger community, to help others update their tools.

There were two notably difficult aspects of updating our tools to support generics:
1. We need to handle the new syntax and types while continuing to build at older Go versions.
2. For analyzers in particular, we often needed to compute a representation of the structural restrictions on a type parameter's type set. For example, this is necessary in the `printf` analyzer to report a diagnostic if any members of the type set to not match the corresponding printf verb.  `go/types` does not yet expose an API for this, because at the time we weren't sure what the correct interface for a type set should be.

Our solutions to both of those problems are contained in the [`x/tools/internal/typeparams`](https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/tools/internal/typeparams) package. This package exposes a transitional API, which at Go 1.18 is just a proxy for the corresponding `go/*` APIs, and at earlier Go versions is a stub.  For example, it exports a `typeparams.Union` type, which is an alias for `go/types.Union` at Go 1.18 but a placeholder at Go 1.17. Furthermore the [`typeparams.StructuralTerms`](https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/tools/internal/typeparams#StructuralTerms) function computes the 'structural' terms of a type parameter, i.e. the normalized list of structural restrictions, after reducing unions and intersections.

## Proposal

I propose that we to add a new module to `x/exp`, `golang.org/x/exp/typeparams`, which contains the functionality currently exposed by `x/tools/internal/typeparams` (modulo improved documentation and other superficial improvements). By being publicly importable, this module would provide the same functionality to other tools as `x/tools/internal/typeparams` has provided `x/tools`. Furthermore, this module could serve as a home (or entrypoint) for more detailed documentation on how to update tools to support generics. As an initial pass, it could include guidance in its package documentation or in an associated `README`.

I considered instead suggesting that tools simply copy `x/tools/internal/typeparams`, but particularly with the `typeparams.StructuralTerms` API it is possible that we will release bug-fixes, so we should make updating easy.

As for why a new module, and why `x/exp`, consider the following:
 - This package will be small and have no dependencies.
 - At some point we may want to tag a final version and delete it. This could possibly occur upon the release of Go 1.21 (two versions after 1.19, which will probably also contain API additions).

Putting this code in a new module in `x/exp` identifies it as experimental/transient, and means that we won't break builds depending on `x/tools` for other reasons, if/when it is deleted.

## Caveats

If we add `x/exp/typeparams`, it makes sense to use it to replace the existing usage of `x/tools/internal/typeparams`. In that case, `x/exp/typeparams` would not only be required by  `x/tools`, it would be vendored into `cmd` by way of `cmd/vet`. ~It might not be a good precedent to include code from `x/exp` in the go distribution, though I'm not aware of a practical problem with this. We could alternatively create a new submodule of `x/tools`.~  Since this is disallowed, we'll have to keep using `x/tools/internal/typeparams`, and sync it with `x/exp` via a script.

Aside: suggestions for improved APIs are certainly welcome, but I'd like to keep the _initial_ focus of the discussion here about whether or not to create such a module, and where to put it. If this proposal is accepted, we can shift discussion to the details.



==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #2 by timothy-king ---
It may be worth emphasizing that without this package [or something similar] it is challenging to develop tools that deal with the `types` package that can be compiled with pre-Go 1.18 compilers and also supports generics.

> If we add x/exp/typeparams, it makes sense to use it to replace the existing usage of x/tools/internal/typeparams. In that case, x/exp/typeparams would not only be required by x/tools, it would be vendored into cmd by way of cmd/vet.

A way to avoid the vendoring from `x/exp` into `cmd` is to have another vendored copy in something like `x/tools`. Which `x/tools/internal/typeparams` already is. Maintaining both `x/tools/internal/typeparams` and a `x/exp/typeparams` is clearly not ideal, but neither is vendoring `x/exp` into `cmd`.

> Furthermore the typeparams.StructuralTerms function computes the 'structural' terms of a type parameter, i.e. the normalized list of structural restrictions, after reducing unions and intersections.

We may need a permanent home for the hard to implement utilities like this. `x/tools/go/types` comes to mind. Might be good to resolve this now? Not sure if this is feasible now though.

--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
Indeed. Right now tip.golang.org/pkg/constraints/?m=old is failing for precisely this reason.
(It is built against Go 1.16 because that's what App Engine provides.)

--- Comment #4 by rsc ---
It is disallowed to have any x repo, nor the main repo, depend on x/exp.
Please leave things as they are and just make a copy in x/exp.
It's fine if there is a script to update the x/exp copy.


--- Comment #5 by findleyr ---
> It is disallowed to have any x repo, nor the main repo, depend on x/exp.
Please leave things as they are and just make a copy in x/exp.
It's fine if there is a script to update the x/exp copy.

SGTM. It is better for us to maintain two copies than have every tool to maintain its own copy...

--- Comment #6 by findleyr ---
@timothy-king 

> We may need a permanent home for the hard to implement utilities like this. x/tools/go/types comes to mind. Might be good to resolve this now? Not sure if this is feasible now though.

I think this should eventually be a part of `go/types` itself, perhaps in 1.19.  We just didn't want to commit to an API before we understood the subtleties and applications of type sets (and FWIW I'm still glad we made this decision).

--- Comment #7 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/377834 mentions this issue: `internal/typeparams/example: start adding a guide to generics for tools`

--- Comment #8 by mvdan ---
Out of curiosity, would this be a v0 or a v1+ module? "tag a final version and delete it" makes me think that we may not need to reach a v1.0.0.

--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
We have no v1 in x repos yet (working on it) so I don't think we'd start with this one.


--- Comment #10 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #11 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #12 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/380554 mentions this issue: `internal/typeparams: add a helper to return the origin method`

--- Comment #13 by findleyr ---
This was blocked by beta2 and some outstanding concerns about predicates on generic types (#50887), with both of those hopefully resolved, I'll work on implementing this tomorrow.  I'll put together a CL for the new module, and leave it open for at least a week to invite comments.

--- Comment #14 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/383375 mentions this issue: `typeparams: a new module with a transitional API for generics in tools`

--- Comment #15 by findleyr ---
Hi! Please add comments on https://golang.org/cl/383375 if you have opinions on the API for this new module. Even naming suggestions are appreciated.

I am pretty content with the current API, though one likely upcoming change is the name `StructuralTerms`: the word `structural` is being revisited in the spec this week, and we'll likely want to align with whatever terminology emerges there.

--- Comment #16 by findleyr ---
I've submitted the initial CL for this module: https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/exp/typeparams

I didn't get much feedback on the CL, so decided to add a caveat that the API is still experimental. Please try to use it in your projects, and let me know if you have opinions.  I will remove the caveat in around a week, at which point we will not break the API (though we may still deprecate things).

Meanwhile, I am lagging behind on documentation, unfortunately. With 1.18 issues more or less resolved at this point, it is my highest priority.

--- Comment #17 by gopherbot ---
Change https://go.dev/cl/388274 mentions this issue: `exp/typeparams: add a guide to the new APIs`

--- Comment #18 by gopherbot ---
Change https://go.dev/cl/391674 mentions this issue: `exp/typeparams: remove caveat around usage`
