=== Fetching Proposal: I_kwDOAWBuf85Fqslq ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/51668

==== [Issue Title] ====
fmt: add FormatString(State) string

==== [Issue Body] ====
I'm currently working with a custom fmt.Formatter implementation. Similar to the request in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/51195, I would like to implement some methods and then "fall back" to the default `fmt` implementation for unimplemented verbs.

It's difficult to do this because State does not allow you to reconstruct the original format string, unless you enumerate all of the possible characters in a format string and call `Flag(char)` on each one. This is lengthy and error prone. 

I would like to formally propose what @bcmills suggested in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/25150, which is to add a String() api to `fmt.State`. 

```go
// State represents the printer state passed to custom formatters.
// It provides access to the io.Writer interface plus information about
// the flags and options for the operand's format specifier.
type State interface {
	// Write is the function to call to emit formatted output to be printed.
	Write(b []byte) (n int, err error)
	// Width returns the value of the width option and whether it has been set.
	Width() (wid int, ok bool)
	// Precision returns the value of the precision option and whether it has been set.
	Precision() (prec int, ok bool)

	// Flag reports whether the flag c, a character, has been set.
	Flag(c int) bool

         // String returns the original format string that was used to create this State (e.g. "%#v")
         String() string
}
```

I doubt that there are many implementations of the API, which would limit the amount of breakage from adding a new method. 

In the standard library, there is currently only one implementation of `fmt.State` - in the `pp` struct. 

If someone can give me pointers on how to do a search across all of Github, I would be happy to check whether there are in-the-wild implementations of fmt.State. I'd also appreciate if someone could do the same inside of Google.

Thanks to Bryan Mills, Github user seebs and Eric Lagergren for initial suggestions and discussion.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by bcmills ---
To clarify, I don't think we should add the `String` method to the `fmt.State` interface — just to the implementation that the `fmt` package itself passes to `Format` methods.

(In retrospect I think it was a mistake to make `State` an interface in the first place, but given how early the `fmt` package was designed I can understand how that mistake could have been made at the time. 😅)

--- Comment #2 by ianlancetaylor ---
Technically we can't add a method to the `fmt.State` interface.  But we can add a `String` method to the underlying type `fmt.pp`.  Retitling.

--- Comment #3 by ianlancetaylor ---
CC @robpike 

--- Comment #4 by kevinburke ---
> But we can add a String method to the underlying type fmt.pp. Retitling.

What would that let us do, though? Where I am imagining this would be most useful is in third party code that is inside of a `Format()` function call:

```go
func (b myType) Format(w fmt.State, verb rune) {
    // here
}
```

The general shape of that function, I would imagine, is something like the other proposal:

1. Implement some of the verbs and flags with my custom behavior.
2. For the rest of them, invoke `fmt.Fprintf(w, ???, b)` or similar.

where ??? is, in theory, the recovered passed in format string.

If `w` is a `fmt.pp` under the hood, I don't think I can cast it to a `fmt.Stringer` or a `fmt.pp` there, can I? Sorry for being dense.

**edit:** ahhh... if we added String() you could do `fmt.Sprint(w fmt.State)` or whatever and recover the original string. Which is indirect but still gets us what we want.

--- Comment #5 by extemporalgenome ---
@ianlancetaylor presumably it'd look like:

```
func (b myType) Format(w fmt.State, verb rune) {
   type derivedType myType
   fmt.Fprintf(w, w.String(), derivedType(b))
}
```

(that would mask any myType.String method though, and `%T` and `%#v` fallbacks wouldn't display the right type name, but otherwise, it'd be a generally feasible approach)

--- Comment #6 by extemporalgenome ---
That said, I believe https://github.com/golang/go/issues/51195#issuecomment-1067202809 is cleaner.

> Perhaps we could just document that when fmt.State receives no writes, it'll just re-interpret the value as though it were not a fmt.Formatter, and proceed accordingly (thus the "fallback" would merely be returning from the Format method without the fmt.State.Write method having been called).

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
I'm not sure we should be adding invisible methods here. The solution proposed in #51195 is completely visible - it doesn't need people to know things that aren't in the type system. A new method you type-assert would be different.

--- Comment #8 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
One possibility is to have a top-level function from fmt.State to string, like

    package fmt
    func FormatString(State) string



--- Comment #10 by gopherbot ---
Change https://go.dev/cl/400875 mentions this issue: `fmt: add a function to recover the original format string given a State`

--- Comment #11 by StevenACoffman ---
@knz implemented https://github.com/knz/go-fmtfwd with some difficulty to work around this very issue.

--- Comment #12 by rsc ---
@robpike has posted a CL at https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/go/+/400875. The API is almost what I wrote earlier, adding 'verb rune' to the argument list:

    package fmt
    func FormatString(state State, verb rune) string

This provides access to what was requested, just without a new State method.

Does anyone object to this API?


--- Comment #13 by robpike ---
Actually it's not quite the same. The actual change is

```
package fmt
func FormatString(state State, verb rune) string
```

as State does not contain the verb. The verb is always at the end, so the caller could add it, but doing it here can remove an allocation.

--- Comment #14 by knz ---
Would it be possible to preserve a slice that refers to the portion in the original format string in the state, and return that instead of constructing a new string?

-- 
Verstuurd vanaf mijn Android apparaat met K-9 Mail. Excuseer mijn beknoptheid.

--- Comment #15 by robpike ---
No, because State is an interface.

--- Comment #16 by rsc ---
Updated comment to record 'verb rune' in API.


--- Comment #17 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #18 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group

