=== Fetching Proposal: I_kwDOAWBuf85JmJWI ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/52885

==== [Issue Title] ====
x/sys/unix: add RecvmsgBuffers and SendmsgBuffers

==== [Issue Body] ====
The golang.org/x/sys/unix package was created with `Recvmsg` and `Sendmsg` functions copied from the ones in the syscall package.  Those date back to https://go.dev/cl/2331044, committed in 2010 for #1101.  Unfortunately, those `Recvmsg` and `Sendmsg` functions do not correspond to the `recvmsg` and `sendmsg` system calls.  The system calls take a pointer to a `Msghdr` struct.  The `Recvmsg` and `Sendmsg` functions build a `Msghdr` instance, but they don't support the full functionality of `recvmsg` and `sendmsg`: they don't permit setting up the scatter/gather array.

Working directly with a `Msghdr` is awkward for the x/sys/unix routines.  It seems better to provide some translation for the socket address.  Still, we should provide access to the scatter/gather array.  I propose the following:

```Go
// RecvmsgBufs receives a message from a socket using the recvmsg system call.
// The flags are passed to recvmsg. Any non-control data read is scattered into bufs. The results are:
//  - n is the number of non-control data read into bufs
//  - oobn is the number of control data read into oob; this may be interpreted using [ParseSocketControlMessage]
//  - recvflags is flags returned by recvmsg
//  - from is the address of the sender
func RecvmsgBufs(fd int, bufs [][]byte, oob []byte, flags int) (n, oobn int, recvflags int, from Sockaddr, err error)

// SendmsgBufs sends a message on a socket to an address using the sendmsg system call.
// The flags are passed to sendmsg. Any non-control data writen is gathered from bufs.
// The function returns the number of bytes written to the socket.
func SendmsgBufs(fd int, bufs [][]byte, oob []byte, to Sockaddr, flags int) (int, error)
```

Part of the goal of these functions is to simply the golang.org/x/net/internal/socket package, which currently reaches into the syscall package for `syscall.recvmsg` and `syscall.sendmsg`.

CC @tklauser @mdlayher 

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by tklauser ---
I agree, these seem like useful functions to have in `x/sys/unix`.

--- Comment #2 by jech ---
Minor nit: I suggest renaming `oob []byte` to `control []byte`, so that the function is easier to correlate with the manual page, and the `ParseSocketControlMessage` is easier to find.

--- Comment #3 by mdlayher ---
I think the general historical trend has been to mimic the C API names.

SGTM on adding these functions.

--- Comment #4 by rsc ---
Since we spelled out net.Buffers for a [][]byte, should we call this Buffers instead of Bufs too?


--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #6 by jech ---
> Since we spelled out net.Buffers for a [][]byte, should we call this Buffers instead of Bufs too?

I could be wrong, but it is my understanding that the reason why net.Buffers is a named type is that it has two methods attached (it implements Reader and WriterTo).  I don't think that's required or even desirable here.

--- Comment #7 by ianlancetaylor ---
We're not going to actually use `net.Buffers` here.  The question is whether the new functions should be named `RecvmsgBuffers` and `SendmsgBuffers`.

--- Comment #8 by jech ---
Thanks for the clarification.


--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
I think we should probably spell out Buffers but otherwise it sounds like no one objects to this.


--- Comment #10 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #11 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #12 by gopherbot ---
Change https://go.dev/cl/412496 mentions this issue: `unix: change Solaris Iovec.Base to *byte`

--- Comment #13 by gopherbot ---
Change https://go.dev/cl/412497 mentions this issue: `unix: add RecvmsgBuffers and SendmsgBuffers`

--- Comment #14 by gopherbot ---
Change https://go.dev/cl/419914 mentions this issue: `unix: fix sendmsgN return value for empty iovecs and non-empty oob`
