=== Fetching Proposal: I_kwDOAWBuf85KCsIq ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/53002

==== [Issue Title] ====
net/http/httputil: replace Director with Rewrite

==== [Issue Body] ====
This proposal seeks to address #50580. The quick summary for the motivation is that the ReverseProxy request-rewriting hook needs to make a clear distinction between the request received by the proxy and the forwarded request sent by the proxy. The existing Director hook does not make this distinction, resulting in unsafe behavior. See #50580 for details.

I propose adding a `Rewrite` hook to `httputil.ReverseProxy`, superseding the existing `Director` hook. `Rewrite` will take a `*httputil.Rewriter` parameter. The `Rewriter` will provide the inbound and outbound requests, as well as convenience methods for modifying the outbound request.

A `ReverseProxy` with a `Rewrite` function will default to making minimal modifications to the outbound request. In particular, it will not add `X-Forwarded-*` headers by default. Methods on `Rewriter` will provide an easy way to add these headers if desired: `Rewriter.SetXForwarded` to add headers (replacing any sent by the client) or `Rewriter.AppendXForwarded` (appending to ones sent by the client, the current default behavior). This imposes a small additional requirement on users of `ReverseProxy`, but makes the proxy behavior explicit and easier to change in the future.

Proposed API additions:

```
type ReverseProxy struct {
        // Rewrite is be a function which modifies  
        // the request into a new request to be sent
        // using Transport. Its response is then copied
        // back to the original client unmodified.
        // Rewrite must not access the provided Rewriter
        // or its contents after returning.
        //
        // The X-Forwarded-For header is not automatically set when
        // Rewrite is used. Use the Rewriter.SetXForwarded method
        // to set it.
        //
        // At most one of Rewrite or Director may be set.
        Rewrite func(*Rewriter)
}

// A Rewriter contains a request to be rewritten by a ReverseProxy.
type Rewriter struct {                                  
        // InReq is the request received by the proxy.
        // The Rewrite function must not modify InReq.
        InReq *http.Request                                        
                                                                 
        // OutReq is the request which will be sent by the proxy.
        // The Rewrite function may modify this request.       
        // Hop-by-hop headers are removed from this request   
        // before Rewrite is called.   
        OutReq *http.Request                                     
}            
                                       
// SetURL routes the outbound request to the scheme, host, and base path
// provided in target. If the target's path is "/base" and the incoming
// request was for "/dir", the target request will be for "/base/dir".
// SetURL does not rewrite the Host header.                           
func (r *Rewriter) SetURL(target *url.URL) {}

// SetXForwarded sets the X-Forwarded-For, X-Forwarded-Host, and     
// X-Forwarded-Proto headers of the outbound request.        
//
//   - The X-Forwarded-For header is set to the client IP address.
//   - The X-Forwarded-Host header is set to the host name requested
//     by the client.
//   - The X-Forwarded-Proto header is set to "http" or "https", depending
//     on whether the inbound request was made on a TLS-enabled connection.
func (r *Rewriter) SetXForwarded() {}

// SetXForwarded sets the X-Forwarded-For, X-Forwarded-Host, and
// X-Forwarded-Proto headers of the outbound request. It behaves
// like SetXForwarded, but appends the client IP address to the
// X-Forwarded-For header in the inbound request (if present).
func (r *Rewriter) AppendXForwarded() {}
```

Example usage:

```
// This is the equivalent of httputil.NewSingleHostReverseProxy(someURL).
proxy := httputil.ReverseProxy{
        Rewrite: func(r *httputil.Rewriter) {
                r.SetXForwarded()
                r.SetURL(someURL)
        }
}
```

A draft implementation is in https://go.dev/cl/407214.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #2 by urandom2 ---
I am bike shedding, but `httputil.Rewriter` looks like it should be an interface.

I do not see discussion in #50580, so I will ask here: what is the benefit to the `func(*struct{})` and (void?) methods, over having `httputil.ReverseProxy.Rewrite` be a struct with fields to be configured? It seems more complex, which I think is a bit of a double edged sword, but I have not seen this pattern elsewhere in the stdlib. My alternative would look like this in your example:
```go
// This is the equivalent of httputil.NewSingleHostReverseProxy(someURL).
proxy := httputil.ReverseProxy{
        Rewrite: httputil.Rewrite{
                SetXForwarded: true,
                SetURL: someURL
        }
}
```

--- Comment #3 by neild ---
`Rewriter` definitely isn't an interface. There's only one implementation of it, and we want to be able to add methods to it in the future.

The proposed `Rewrite` hook, like the `Director` hook that it would supersede, is a user-provided function that can perform any amount of modification of a proxied request before it is forwarded. It can't be replaced by a fixed list of operations.

--- Comment #4 by urandom2 ---
> `Rewriter` definitely isn't an interface. There's only one implementation of it, and we want to be able to add methods to it in the future.

Should have been more clear: `pkg.Doer`, to me, looks like an interface because it ends in -er. We may want to consider a different name.

> The proposed `Rewrite` hook, like the `Director` hook that it would supersede, is a user-provided function that can perform any amount of modification of a proxied request before it is forwarded. It can't be replaced by a fixed list of operations.

Yep, sorry the example pigenholed my thinking; that makes sense.

That said, why then would we not make it `Rewrite: func(*http.Request) *http.Request`? Having the methods for setURL or forward headers as utility functions could be useful outside this usecase.

You could also have two inputs if void is desirable: `func(in, out *http.Request)`. It could also be worth making in an `http.Request`, no pointer, to suggest/enforce this immutability requirement.

--- Comment #5 by neild ---
`func(*http.Request) *http.Request` doesn't address #50580. If the input request contains hop-by-hop headers, we can't tell if a header in the output was added by the rewriter; if the input doesn't contain hop-by-hop headers, the rewriter has no way to look for ones it may be interested in. We need to pass both the inbound and outbound requests to the user hook.

Wrapping both requests up in a `Rewriter` type gives us a good place to hang additional functions such as `SetURL`. While the ones in this proposal could also be stand-alone functions, making them methods of a type passed to `Rewrite` is good for discoverability, especially given the overly-broad API surface in `httputil`. It also gives us the option of adding methods in the future that customize the proxy behavior in other ways.

--- Comment #6 by urandom2 ---
> `func(*http.Request) *http.Request` doesn't address #50580. If the input request contains hop-by-hop headers, we can't tell if a header in the output was added by the rewriter; if the input doesn't contain hop-by-hop headers, the rewriter has no way to look for ones it may be interested in. We need to pass both the inbound and outbound requests to the user hook.


No that makes sense, there has already been some preprocessing done to create a populated `Rewriter.OutReq`, thus we would need the two parameter form:
```go
// This is the equivalent of httputil.NewSingleHostReverseProxy(someURL).
proxy := httputil.ReverseProxy{
        Rewrite: func(in, out *http.Request) { ...}
}
```

> Wrapping both requests up in a `Rewriter` type gives us a good place to hang additional functions such as `SetURL`. While the ones in this proposal could also be stand-alone functions, making them methods of a type passed to `Rewrite` is good for discoverability, especially given the overly-broad API surface in `httputil`. It also gives us the option of adding methods in the future that customize the proxy behavior in other ways.

Yeah, if we see a clear need to add new struct fields or methods that include magic [recte internal apis], I can see this being useful; it just feels like a novel design pattern akin to grpc input structs, which feel decidedly non go-like. I just prefer the obvious nature of my explicit format.

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
Have we resolved the objections to Rewriter?
Should we tentatively try to land it early in Go 1.20?
What other open issues would we be able to close if we add Rewriter?


--- Comment #8 by neild ---
Perhaps there's a better name than `Rewriter`, but in the absence of a concrete idea for something I think it's fine. (`RewriteState`? `RewriteContext`?)

Landing this early in 1.20 would be nice.

Looking through issues that mention `ReverseProxy`:

Primary motivation for this proposal (and sufficient to justify it, I believe, since this is a security concern):
* #50580

Issues related to forwarding headers (`X-Forwarded-For`, etc.). Making the addition of `X-Forwarded` headers explicit makes it easier to adjust this behavior in a backwards-compatible fashion.
* #50465
* #31095
* #30963

Issues related to `NewSingleHostReverseProxy` preserving the inbound request's `Host` header. We could make the `Rewriter.SetURL` method clear the inbound `Host`. Even if we preserve the current behavior of preserving the host, `Rewrite` makes it much simpler for the user to customize the proxy behavior, since it doesn't require wrapping the `Director` function created by `NewSingleHostReverseProxy`.
* #28168
* #33861

--- Comment #9 by neild ---
Possibly better name than `Rewriter`: `ProxyRequest`.

--- Comment #10 by gopherbot ---
Change https://go.dev/cl/407214 mentions this issue: `net/http/httputil: add ReverseProxy.Rewrite`

--- Comment #11 by neild ---
[CL 407214](https://go.dev/cl/407214) contains an implementation of this proposal, with a few changes from the original post:

* Renamed `Rewriter` to `ProxyRequest`.
* When using a `Rewrite` func,
    * The default behavior is to send no `X-Forwarded-*` headers (stripping ones from the inbound request).
    * `ProxyRequest.SetXForwarded` will set `X-Forwarded-*`.
    * To append to the client's `X-Forwarded-For` header, copy the inbound header to the outbound request and call `ProxyRequest.SetXForwarded`.
* `ProxyRequest.SetURL` sets the outbound request's `Host` header.

The `X-Forwarded-*` changes preference more secure behavior (not to trust the client's headers).

The `SetURL` change addresses #28168, while leaving it simple to get the current behavior of `NewSingleHostReverseProxy` back if desired.

--- Comment #12 by seankhliao ---
If we're clearing `X-Forwarded-*`, then should `Forwarded` also be preemptively cleared?

--- Comment #13 by neild ---
Yes, I'm actually already clearing `Forwarded` in the CL but neglected to mention it specifically.

--- Comment #14 by rsc ---
FWIW when I said "objections to Rewriter" I meant this proposal generally, not the name. We should use whatever name you think is clearest; Rewriter is fine if so.

Does anyone object to trying this in Go 1.20?


--- Comment #15 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #16 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #17 by gopherbot ---
Change https://go.dev/cl/450515 mentions this issue: `doc/go1.20: add release notes for net/http and net/http/httputil`
