=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU2MDc0MTIxNTI= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/38687

==== [Issue Title] ====
cmd/go: add 'go generate -skip'

==== [Issue Body] ====
We currently have the `-run` flag, but I believe it is currently impossible to supply a regular expression that would allow for _excluding_ a certain expression (due to no lookaheads in Go's regex syntax). Being able to exclude expressions would be useful if we want to exclude certain directives that are time-consuming and are not needed in the moment, and we want to run a large amount of other directives, so that it would be impractical to simply run `go generate` multiple times with different `-run` flags.

I think one way to implement this could be an additional flag. Similar to `grep`'s `--invert-match` flag, we could do something like:
```
go generate -invertmatch -run="my excluded pattern" ./...
``` 

Alternatively, we could also have a different flag that is used instead of `-run`, like:
```
go generate -runexcept="my excluded pattern" ./...
```
Here, supplying both `-runexcept` and `-run` would be invalid.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by rsc ---
I'm not sure we should do anything here, but if we did, it should apply to the other -run flags too.

--- Comment #2 by jayconrod ---
#41583 is an accepted proposal for a `go test -skip` flag that sounds similar. What about bringing that to `go generate`?

--- Comment #3 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #4 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #6 by gopherbot ---
Change https://go.dev/cl/421440 mentions this issue: `cmd/go: add go generate -skip flag`
