=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU3OTAzODgyNTU= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/43814

==== [Issue Title] ====
all: make darwin/arm64 a first-class port

==== [Issue Body] ====
I assume that darwin/arm64 is now also a first-class port as of Go 1.16?

Add it to the list at https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/PortingPolicy#first-class-ports ?

/cc @dmitshur (who I just saw edit that page)


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by dmitshur ---
I read over #41385 and #38485, and I didn't see us making a decision on this (we may have agreed verbally in meetings).

It seems very reasonable. I think the port is meeting the three documented properties by now:
- we treat critical darwin/arm64 issues as release-blocking (this is my understanding, but worth confirming what others think)
- we provide official binaries (#42756), and
- the installation is documented at https://golang.org/doc/install (although this page may need to be updated slightly, I don't think it suggests the darwin/arm64 installer yet; filed #43815).

I don't have concerns about graduating darwin/arm64 to be a first class port from my side. (Since darwin/amd64 is already a first class port, this is really more about "when" rather than "if".)

Since making any port a first class port requires a commitment from the entire Go team, let's make this a proposal (like #35593 was, to keep up the precedent), so others on the team can participate before we commit to a decision. (It'll take longer, but I don't think there's any rush here.)

CC @golang/release, @cherrymui, @aclements, @FiloSottile, @rsc.

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
We're already distributing binaries, so this is a first-class port. Let's update the docs. Thanks!


--- Comment #3 by dmitshur ---
Done in wiki commit [`87f61988`](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/PortingPolicy/_compare/87f61988213cad993c0a93fd65f0d941490904ad%5E...87f61988213cad993c0a93fd65f0d941490904ad).
