=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU4NDg4Mzk3MDQ= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/45346

==== [Issue Title] ====
spec: generics: use type sets to remove type keyword in constraints

==== [Issue Body] ====
We propose clarifications for the semantics of constraint satisfaction in the [generics proposal](https://go.googlesource.com/proposal/+/refs/heads/master/design/43651-type-parameters.md).  We also propose changing the syntax of type lists to remove the `type` keyword and to explicitly specify when type arguments should match on underlying types.

The changes this would make to the current generics proposal document can be seen in https://golang.org/cl/306689.

## Background

The [current generics proposal](https://go.googlesource.com/proposal/+/refs/heads/master/design/43651-type-parameters.md) proposes a new syntax for type lists within interfaces.  A type list within an interface is the keyword `type` followed by a list of types separated by commas.  Type lists are only permitted in interface types that are used as type constraints.  For example:

```
// SignedInteger is a type constraint that permits any
// signed integer type.
type SignedInteger interface {
	type int, int8, int16, int32, int64
}
```

A type argument matches a constraint with a type list if

1. The type argument implements the interface ignoring the type list, and
2. either the type argument or its underlying type is identical to one of the types in the type list.

This rule was adopted in part to support permitting type lists in ordinary interface types, not only in constraints.  However, [discussion](https://golang.org/issue/41716) has made clear that the rule is too subtle.  This suggests that it is too subtle not just for use in ordinary interface types, but also for use in constraints.

The behavior when embedding interfaces with type lists is also subtle.

We can do better.

## Type sets

We start by defining a _type set_ for all types.  We will define what it means for a type to implement an interface in terms of type sets, resulting in a behavior that is equivalent to the current definition based on method sets.

Every type has an associated type set.  The type set of an ordinary non-interface type `T` is simply the set `{T}` which contains just `T` itself.  The type set of an interface type (in this section we only discuss ordinary interface types, without type lists) is the set of all types that declare all the methods of the interface.

Note that the type set of an interface type is an infinite set.  For any given type `T` and interface type `IT` it's easy to tell whether `T` is in the type set of `IT` (by checking whether all methods of `IT` are declared by `T`), but there is no reasonable way to enumerate all the types in the type set of `IT`.  The type `IT` is a member of its own type set because an interface inherently declares all of its own methods.  The type set of the empty interface `interface{}` is the set of all possible types.

With this idea of type sets, we can restate what it means for a type `T` to implement an interface type `IT`: `T` implements `IT` if `T` is a member of the type set of `IT`.  Since the type set of `IT` is the set of all types that declare all the methods of the interface, `T` is a member of the type set of `IT` if and only if the method set of `T` is a (possibly improper) superset of the method set of `IT`, which is the standard definition of [implementing an interface](https://golang.org/ref/spec#Interface_types).

Now let's consider embedded interfaces.  For a case like `type O1 interface{ E }`, the type set of `O1` is the same as the type set of `E`.  The case `type O2 interface{ E1; E2 }` is more interesting: the type set of `O2` is the intersection of the type sets of `E1` and `E2`.  To see this, observe that the type set of `E1` is the set of all types that implement all the methods of `E1`, and similarly for `E2`.  What we want for the type set of `O2` is the set of all types that implement all the methods of `O2`.  The methods of `O2` are all of the methods of `E1` combined with all of the methods of `E2`.  The set of types that implement all the methods of both `E1` and `E2` is the intersection of the type sets of `E1` and `E2`.

Note that listing a method in an interface type definition in the usual way is, from a type set perspective, indistinguishable from embedding an interface that declares just that method.  Although a method by itself is not a type, for our purposes we can say that the type set for a method listed explicitly in an interface type definition is exactly the type set of an interface type with only that method: the set of all types that implement that method.  The advantage of doing this is that we can now say that the type set of an interface type is exactly the intersection of the type sets of each element listed in the interface.

We've now described type sets, and we've explained the meaning of implementing an interface in terms of type sets.  None of this changes the language in any way, but it serves as background and motivation for the next steps.

## Proposal

We propose to replace [type lists](https://go.googlesource.com/proposal/+/refs/heads/master/design/43651-type-parameters.md#type-lists-in-constraints) as defined by the generics proposal with three new, simpler, ideas.

An interface type that is used as a constraint, or that is embedded in a constraint, is permitted to embed some additional constructs that we will call _interface elements_.  An interface element can be:

1. Any type, not just an interface type.
2. A new syntactic construct called an _approximation element_.
3. A new syntactic construct called a _union element_.

With these new elements we will be able to state simply that a type argument `A` satisfies a constraint `C` exactly when `A` implements the interface type `C`, or, in terms of type sets, exactly when `A` is a member of the type set of `C`.

First, we propose that an interface type used as a constraint is permitted to embed a non-interface type.  For example: `type Integer interface{ int }`.  As discussed in the previous section, the type set of an interface type is the intersection of the type sets of the elements of the interface.  The type set of `int` is simply `{int}`.  This means that the type set of `Integer` is also `{int}`.
This constraint can be satisfied by any type that is a member of the set `{int}`.  There is exactly one such type: `int`.

Of course, that is useless by itself.  For constraint satisfaction, we want to be able to say not just `int`, but "any type whose underlying type is `int`."  To implement this, we propose a new syntactic construct, which may be embedded in an interface type used as a constraint.  This is an approximation element, written as `~T`.  The type set of an approximation `~T` is the set of all types whose underlying type is `T`.  An approximation `~T` is only valid if the underlying type of `T` is itself `T`; this is discussed in more detail below.

For example: `type AnyInt interface{ ~int }`.  The type set of `~int`, and therefore the type set of `AnyInt`, is the set of all types whose underlying type is `int`.  For example, if `MyInt` is defined as `type MyInt int`, then `MyInt` used as a type argument will satisfy the constraint `AnyInt`.

The final step is another new syntactic construct that may be embedded in an interface type used as a constraint: a union element.  A union element is written as a sequence of types or approximation elements separated by vertical bars (`|`).  For example: `int | float32` or `~int8 | ~int16 | ~int32 | ~int64`.  The type set of a union element is the union of the type sets of each element in the sequence.  The types and elements listed in a union must all be different: no two types may be [identical](https://golang.org/ref/spec#Type_identity), and no two approximation elements `~T1` and `~T2` may have `T1` identical to `T2`.  For example:

```
type PredeclaredSignedInteger interface {
	int | int8 | int16 | int32 | int64
}
```

The type set of this union element is the set `{int, int8, int16, int32, int64}`.  Since the union is the only element of `PredeclaredSignedInteger`, that is also the type set of `PredeclaredSignedInteger`.  This constraint can be satisfied by any of those five types.

Here is an example using approximation elements:

```
type SignedInteger interface {
	~int | ~int8 | ~int16 | ~int32 | ~int64
}
```

The type set of this constraint is the set of all types whose underlying type is one of `int`, `int8`, `int16`, `int32`, or `int64`.
Any of those types will satisfy this constraint.  This is the equivalent of the notation used in the generics proposal

```
interface {
	type int, int8, int16, int32, int64
}
```

The use of explicit approximation elements clarifies when we are matching on underlying types, the use of `|` instead of `,` emphasizes that this is a union of elements, and the `type` keyword can be omitted by permitting constraints to embed non-interface elements.

The purpose of introducing type lists in the generics proposal was to specify the operations available to type parameters in parameterized functions.  This is easy to define based on the idea of type sets.  Given a type parameter `P` with a constraint `C`, a parameterized function is permitted to use an operation with a value of type `P` if the operation is permitted for every member of the type set of `C`.

That is the complete proposal: a conceptual change to use type sets, and three new syntax changes.  We will now mention some details and ramifications.

### Approximation elements

The new `~T` syntax will be the first use of `~` as a token in Go.

Since `~T` means the set of all types whose underlying type is `T`, it will be an error to use `~T` with a type `T` whose underlying type is not itself.  Types whose underlying types are themselves are:

1. Type literals, such as `[]byte` or `struct{ f int }`.
2. Predeclared types, such as `int` or `string`.

We do not permit `~P` where `P` is a type parameter.

The type set of `~T` is an infinite set of types.

The `~` will bind more tightly than `|`.
`~T1 | T2` means `(~T1) | (T2)`, not `~(T1 | T2)` (note that `~(T1 | T2)` is not syntactically valid)..

The new syntax is

```
InterfaceType = "interface" "{" { ( MethodSpec | InterfaceTypeName | ConstraintElem ) ";" } "}" .
ConstraintElem = ConstraintTerm { "|" ConstraintTerm } .
ConstraintTerm = [ "~" ] Type .
```

### Embedding constraints

A constraint can embed another constraint.  Union elements can include constraints.

```
// Signed is a constraint whose type set is any signed integer type.
type Signed interface {
	~int | ~int8 | ~int16 | ~int32 | ~int64
}

// Unsigned is a constraint whose type set is any unsigned integer type.
type Unsigned interface {
	~uint | ~uint8 | ~uint16 | ~uint32 | ~uint64 | ~uintptr
}

// Float is a constraint whose type set is any floating point type.
type Float interface {
	~float32 | ~float64
}

// Ordered is a constraint whose type set is any ordered type.
// That is, any type that supports the < operator.
type Ordered interface {
	Signed | Unsigned | Float | ~string
}
```

### Interface types in union constraint elements

The type set of a union element is the union of the type sets of all elements in the union.  For most types `T` the type set of `T` is simply `T` itself.  For interface types (and approximation elements), however, this is not the case.

The type set of an interface type that does not embed a non-interface element is the set of all types that implement the interface, including the interface type itself.  Using such an interface type in a union element will add that type set to the union.  For example:

```
type Stringish interface {
	string | fmt.Stringer
}
```

The type set of `Stringish` will be the type `string` and all types that implement `fmt.Stringer`.  Any of those types (including `fmt.Stringer` itself) will be permitted as a type argument for this constraint.  No operations will be permitted for a value of a type parameter that uses `Stringish` as a constraint (other than operations supported by all types).  This is because `fmt.Stringer` is in the type set of `Stringish`, and `fmt.Stringer`, an interface type, does not support any type-specific operations.  The operations permitted by `Stringish` are those operations supported by all the types in the type set, including `fmt.Stringer`, so in this case there are no operations other than those supported by all types.  A parameterized function that uses this constraint will have to use type assertions or reflection in order to use the values.  Still, this may be useful in some cases for stronger static type checking.  The main point is that it follows directly from the definition of type sets and constraint satisfaction.

### Combining embedded non-interfaces with methods

A constraint can embed a constraint element and also list methods.

```
type StringableSignedInteger interface {
	~int | ~int8 | ~int16 | ~int32 | ~int64
	String() string
}
```

The rules for type sets define what this means.  The type set of the union element is the set of all types whose underlying type is one of the predeclared signed integer types.  The type set of `String() string` is the set of all types that declare that method.  The type set of `StringableSignedInteger` is the intersection of those two type sets.  The result is the set of all types whose underlying type is one of the predeclared signed integer types and that declare the method `String() string`.  A function that uses  a parameterized type `P` that uses `StringableSignedInteger` as a constraint may use the operations permitted for any integer type (`+`, `*`, and so forth) on a value of type `P`.  It may also call the `String` method on a value of type `P` to get back a `string`.

### Empty type sets

It is possible to write a constraint with an empty type set.  There is no type argument that will satisfy such a constraint.  ~~The compiler should give an error whenever it detects such an unsatisfiable constraint.  However, in general a compiler may not be able to detect all such cases.~~  It is not feasible to detect all such cases, though they can't be used with any type argument.  It may be appropriate to have vet give an error for cases that it can detect.

```
// Unsatisfiable is an unsatisfiable constraint with an empty type set.
// No predeclared types have any methods.
// If this used ~int | ~float32 the type set would not be empty.
type Unsatisfiable interface {
	int | float32
	String() string
}
```

### Method sets of constraint elements

Much as the type set of an interface type is the intersection of the type sets of the elements of the interface, the method set of an interface type can be defined as the union of the method sets of the elements of the interface.  In most cases, an embedded element will have no methods, and as such will not contribute any methods to the interface type.  That said, for completeness, we'll note that the method set of `~T` is the method set of `T`.  The method set of a union element is the intersection of the method sets of the elements of the union.  These rules are implied by the definition of type sets, but they are not needed for understanding the behavior of constraints.

### Possible future step: permitting constraints as ordinary interface types

We have proposed that constraints can embed some additional elements.  With this proposal, any interface type that embeds anything other than an interface type can only be used as a constraint or as an embedded element in another constraint.  A natural next step would be to permit using interface types that embed any type, or that embed these new elements, as an ordinary type, not just as a constraint.

We are not proposing that today.  But the rules for type sets and methods set above describe how they would behave.
Any type that is an element of the type set could be assigned to such an interface type.  A value of such an interface type would permit calling any member of the corresponding method set.

This would permit a version of what other languages call sum types or union types.  It would be a Go interface type to which only specific types could be assigned.  Such an interface type could still take the value `nil`, of course, so it would not be quite the same as a typical sum type.

In any case, this is something to consider in a future proposal, not this one.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/306689 mentions this issue: `design: update type parameters design for type sets`

--- Comment #2 by Merovius ---
At first glance, this seems okay to me. Some comments:

1. It makes me a bit sad that the default is exact-matching, with underlying-type-matching needing the `~` token, given that we introduce this for constraints only first and ~all usages in that context should probably use `~`. It seems easy to accidentally use the unadorned types and then get locked into an unnecessarily restrictive constraint. I don't know a good alternative though - the obvious analogy would be to require `=int` for exact matching and it seems less clear that doesn't lead to parsing ambiguities.
2. There recently have been some questions about incomplete, implementation-defined validity checks: [One example on Twitter](https://twitter.com/SchumacherFM/status/1375078075696873474) and [one example on golang-nuts](https://groups.google.com/g/golang-nuts/c/jP_5kSTmSy4/m/YUYkLtQHBwAJ). In both cases, the spec allows the compiler to reject certain programs, but doesn't require it. These questions convinced me that this is a bad idea to put into the spec. We don't want the validity of Go programs to be implementation-defined, IMO. If nothing else, it makes it very hard to change the used heuristic in the future. So, if we can't give a clear rule as to *which* unsatisfyable constraints to disallow (and I don't think we can, in general), I would personally advocate to simply allow them. I don't see a lot of disadvantages - after all, checking if a given type fulfills a constraint is still easy, so an impossibly constrained function can not be instantiated. So even the most basic test would surface the problem, it literally can't be called. And we can always do this as a vet check, which can use any heuristic it likes and can be progressively improved over time.
3. Even though you don't want to bind this to a future extension to sum types, I still think it's reasonable to consider how such an extension could happen - given that this change is prompted by that consideration. Most importantly, such an extension should allow to switch on the matched type. I don't know if you thought about this yet? My first impression is that it would be possible to allow type-assertions/switches of the form `x.(~string)`, which would assert that `x`s underlying type is `string` and if so, evaluate to a `string`. It seems like a natural syntax which would allow everything we'd need and I don't see anything immediately wrong with it. So, ISTM that it's possible to do that extension somewhat naturally - but of course, I've only thought about it for two hours :) [edit] I guess i should've looked at the actual updated design doc first - this possibility is already mentioned there [/edit]



--- Comment #3 by kortschak ---
Part 3. of @Merovius's comment nicely addresses the issue in [Identifying the matched predeclared type](https://go.googlesource.com/proposal/+/refs/heads/master/design/43651-type-parameters.md#identifying-the-matched-predeclared-type) of the Type Parameters Proposal.

--- Comment #4 by DmitriyMV ---
> Since ~T means the set of all types whose underlying type is T, it will be an error to use ~T with a type T whose underlying type is not itself.

Does this mean that we can't define something like:

```go
type Dictionary[K any, V any] interface {
    ~map[K]V
}
```

or

```go
type GenChan[T any] interface {
    ~chan T
}
```

?

--- Comment #5 by griesemer ---
Thanks, @Merovius for the excellent initial feedback. Some comments to your points:

1) Ack. We've looked at `=` and other options, but, to turn the viewpoint around, it would also be somewhat sad to have to say `=int` when we exactly mean just `int`; and to have `int` mean something different than just `int` in the context of a constraint. But I'm sure you gathered as much as well. I suspect that we won't often write `~T` elements in practice because many times we will just use constraints already declared elsewhere, e.g., `constraints.Ordered` or the like. Maybe that's a consolation.

2) It's an excellent point. One might also say that "implementation restrictions" are de-facto parts of the language, and perhaps we need to stop being a "chicken" (my apologies to chickens) and admit as much. With respect to unsatisfiable constraints, we've considered both, not reporting an error, or reporting an error. I agree that if there's no clear rule, we should probably not promise that the compiler reports an error. (Consider also parameterized constraints that may only become unsatisfiable upon instantiation.)

3) I'll let @iant chime in on this one as he's spent more time thinking about this.

--- Comment #6 by griesemer ---
@DmitriyMV No, to the contrary. Such constraints are explicitly permitted because the underlying type of `map[K]V` is itself (same for `chan T`).

--- Comment #7 by DmitriyMV ---
Thanks! So what are those 
> T whose underlying type is not itself

 types for example?

--- Comment #8 by zephyrtronium ---
As I described in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/43651#issuecomment-774607611 and #44235, I think it creates a great *pedagogical* load to reuse the name "interface" for concepts that are not actually types. So, to me, the strength of this proposal is in addressing the concerns raised in #41716. I believe that the right decision is to leave as few releases as possible, ideally zero, between the release of generics and the "possible future step" of using this syntax (or another, if this is ultimately rejected) for sum types. The longer we go without being able to instantiate every type parameter with its own definition, the more tutorials, books, guidelines, and style documents will be written based on it being impossible.

----

@Merovius 

> 1. It makes me a bit sad that the default is exact-matching, with underlying-type-matching needing the `~` token, given that we introduce this for constraints only first and ~all usages in that context should probably use `~`. It seems easy to accidentally use the unadorned types and then get locked into an unnecessarily restrictive constraint. I don't know a good alternative though - the obvious analogy would be to require `=int` for exact matching and it seems less clear that doesn't lead to parsing ambiguities.

Conversely, I like that the default behavior here preserves Go's strong one-to-one relationship between names and types (aside from type aliases, which were introduced late and are usually discouraged). `~` being a new syntactic element meaning "approximately" leaves open a number of future options, including but not limited to type switches and assertions on underlying types as you mentioned.

--- Comment #9 by griesemer ---
@DmitriyMV Any [defined type](https://golang.org/ref/spec#Type_declarations) has an underlying type that is not itself. Look also for the definition of [underlying types](https://golang.org/ref/spec#Types). For instance, `myint` declared as
```Go
type myint int
```
is a defined type whose underlying type is `int`. Writing `~myint` is likely a programmer error because there's no type whose underlying type is `myint`, thus the type set of `~myint` is empty. One could permit it, but that seems like an opportunity missed to catch a bug.

It's important to fully understand the notion of `underlying type` for this proposal.

--- Comment #10 by Merovius ---
@griesemer To be clear: I'm advocating not for "not promising to return an error", but for "promising not to return an error". That is, the compiler should consider an empty type-set valid, but vet might flag it :)

--- Comment #11 by ajwerner ---
I'm wondering whether this proposal has any rough edges related to instantiation of constraints using interface types. Say I do something like below:

```
type I[T any] interface {
    T
}
```

Are either of the following valid:
```
func ToString[A fmt.Stringer, B I[A]](b B) string { 
    return b.String() 
}
```

```
func ToString[A I[fmt.Stringer]](a A) string {
     return a.String()
}
```

edit: my reading is yes and they that are both valid. 

--- Comment #12 by DeedleFake ---
It's kind of a bias from other languages, but my first inclination is to read `~int` as `not int`. I'm sure that I'd get used to it, though, and I agree that it's better than `=int`. I think it makes more sense for it to default to exact, rather than approximate, as it makes embedding a concrete type the same as embedding an interface, as every line just defines a type set and, as stated in the proposal, the type set of a concrete type can contain just itself. Switching that default requires there to be a difference between the two because it would conflict with existing usage _outside_ of interfaces. As proposed, you can think of _any_ usage as a type set, despite some being illegal under the current proposal, at least for now:

```go
var Interface fmt.Stringer // Valid values limited to those in the set of fmt.Stringer.
var Concrete int // Valid values limited to those in the set of int.
```

The second would conflict with the embedding of types if `~int` was replaced with `=int`, though, as `int` would have a different type set in different contexts.

Kind of makes me wonder about the potential legality in the future of `var Underlying ~int` or `var Union ~int | ~float64`. If they were allowed, interfaces would become exactly the same as a named type set, although something like `type Signed ~int | ~int8 | ~int16 | ~int32 | ~int64` would also probably make sense at that point.

Disclaimer: I am not necessarily advocating for `~int` being usable outside of interfaces.

--- Comment #13 by qualidafial ---
Speaking as just a random developer who is pretty new to Go--so take this with a grain of salt--I can't help but feel like the whole constraint interfaces thing is just a complicated end run to avoid having to add operator overloading to the language.

If we had the ability to express that an interface includes specific operators (with whatever syntactic form makes it unambiguous), then we don't need type sets / constraint interfaces to enumerate types.

The generics proposal, with or without this type sets proposal, takes Go further away from structural typing.

Edit: and honestly, we don't even need operator overloading to keep the language unambiguous. We just need a way to express that an interface includes certain operators. Then `Ordered` could just be the interface that includes `<`, `>`, and `==`. And it could apply to any primitive number, string, or any custom type with an ordered underlying type. Operator overloading could come later (if ever)

--- Comment #14 by bserdar ---
Is there a practical use for having both `T` and `~T`? If not, ~ can be dropped.

That is: `T` means "all types derived from T", and there would be no support for "type is T"

--- Comment #15 by kortschak ---
For numerical work you would like to implement `float64` and `float32` cases but probably not derived types (i.e. only `interface{ float32 | float64 }`), while if you wanted to implement an orderable container you would want all orderable types including their derivatives, so `interface{ ~int | ~int8 | ... | ~string }`.

--- Comment #16 by bserdar ---
@kortschak 

> For numerical work you would like to implement `float64` and `float32` cases but probably not derived types (i.e. only `interface{ float32 | float64 }`)

I still can't see the benefit of excluding derived types from such an implementation. If a type has the underlying type of `float64`, is there a case where you don't want to treat it like one? I don't have much experience with numerical work, but I am thinking of a `type Temperature float64` and can't see the benefit of excluding it from a generic function requiring `float64` instead of `~float64`.


--- Comment #17 by kortschak ---
Yeah, I can see your point. The `~` does allow the potential of underlying type switching though, which would be very useful.

--- Comment #18 by fzipp ---
> 1. It makes me a bit sad that the default is exact-matching, with underlying-type-matching needing the `~` token, given that we introduce this for constraints only first and ~all usages in that context should probably use `~`. It seems easy to accidentally use the unadorned types and then get locked into an unnecessarily restrictive constraint.

@Merovius Isn't it better to be accidentally too restricting and have the possibility to lift the restriction later than to be accidentally too permissive? Are there situations where changing T to ~T is a breaking change for the consumer of a parametrized type or function?

--- Comment #19 by zephyrtronium ---
The case for including both `T` and `~T` comes primarily from discussion on #41716 about sum types using the previous proposed type list syntax. Essentially, for generics, `~T` is usually the correct choice, but for a sum type, `T` is usually better. It would be contrary to the philosophy of Go to use different syntaxes for a list of types as generic constraints and a list of types as union options, but having different semantics for the same syntax based on where that syntax appears is even more contrary. This proposal keeps the desirable behavior for generics without obstructing the eventual possibility of sum types by allowing users to choose the appropriate option for each respective use case.

--- Comment #20 by tooolbox ---
At the risk of sounding +1, I would like to say that this seems to be a strong step forward, and that Ian and Robert have my thanks for their ongoing efforts to make generics a reality in a way that fits with Go’s ethos and that gophers can learn easily and use effectively.  No objections to the proposal, although I agree with @zephyrtronium that it would be ideal to narrow the gap between regular interfaces and constraint interfaces, hopefully to nothing, before generics are released, so I look forward to further iteration.

--- Comment #21 by urandom ---
I'm curious whether it would be possible to allow approximations of structs to match not only the underlying type of a particular struct, but also to allow matches for structs that have at least the exact fields that are listed as the approximate struct element?

```go

type Fooer interface {
    ~struct { Foo int; Bar string } 
} 

type MyFoo struct {
    Foo int
    Bar string
    Baz float64
}
```

In the above snippet, there is a potential for allowing types like MyFoo to satisfy the Fooer constraint. This could be quite useful,  as structs are the only class of types that vary wildly. I know of at least one other language that allows for a similar expression 

--- Comment #22 by DmitriyMV ---
@griesemer 
> Any defined type has an underlying type that is not itself.

Maybe this should be added to proposal in a form of explanation "aka having `~Type` where `Type` is a defined type aka `type MyType Type` is invalid. Or something like that?

--- Comment #23 by Merovius ---
@bserdar AFAICT the main reason to have both is the possibility of expanding to sum types. Constraints almost always want to use `~T` and sums almost always want to use `T`. Having both is a form of future-proofing (though as I said, it makes me a bit sad that if we *don't* do that expanding, we'll be stuck with extra `~` all over the place. But only a bit).

@fzipp I'm not sure. It might not be, especially if we only consider the proposal as-is with this change. Note that it's also possible to use constraints defined by other packages for your own function, so it's not *just* the consumers of a generic function that are affected, but also authors. A function that uses a constraint and type-asserts an argument would be an example of a breakage, when this constraint is relaxed. But this is shot from the hip - I have no idea how real/practically relevant this is. It becomes more relevant *if* we expand to sum types though.

@urandom It's definitely possible. I'm not sure it's a good idea though. It's a pretty significant change in the meaning of `~` based on the context.

--- Comment #24 by DmitriyMV ---
@urandom I agree with @Merovius. I think that `T1` which embeds `T` should have a different syntax.

--- Comment #25 by markusheukelom ---
Some questions / remarks:

1) Instead of prefix "~", what about suffix "+"?

```
type Floats interface {
	float32+ | float64+
}
```

This has the benefit of not introducing a new token and does not confuses to read as "not float32 or not float64". Also T- could at some point refer to the underlying type of T, which might be useful to express at some point.

2) Why a new list operater "|" instead of ","

Do this not work?

```
type Floats interface {
	float32+, float64+
} 
```

3) What's the use case of mixin T~ with S in a single list? 

Ie. 

```
type Floats interface {
	int,~int32	
}
```

When would you ever need that?

Instead, would it be possible / sensible to move the "~" to the parameter type side? I.e.

```
type Floats interface {float32, float64}
func Min[F ~Floats](a, b F) F 		// accept all floats, or all types with float as underlying type
```
 
4) Why ramming it into the interface construct?

Could something like this work to declare a type set/list?

```
type[] Floats {float32,float34} 		
type[] Strings  {string, fmt.Stringer}		
```

To me, an interface is used when you care about functionality only (methods) and not about representation (actual type). So the word "interface" does not resonate very well to me with a type list (plus the interface concept of Go is already quite involved).

--- Comment #26 by akavel ---
There's [an interesting comment on r/golang](https://old.reddit.com/r/golang/comments/mi8e82/type_sets_being_proposed_to_replace_type_lists/gt4ccov/), bringing up a parallel of this proposed syntax resembling the (also newline-based) boolean/set logic syntax of `// +build` directives, which was [eventually found to be confusing and is expected to be replaced by a more "traditional" syntax for `//go:build`](https://golang.org/design/draft-gobuild). Although this technically qualifies as 🚲 🏠 🖌️ -ing, in light of the `//go:build` situation I believe it might be worth calling out at least in passing a consideration of the currently proposed vs. more explicit syntax somewhere in the document.

--- Comment #27 by Merovius ---
@markusheukelom As for question 3: `type Stringish interface { ~string | fmt.Stringer }`.

--- Comment #28 by scyth ---
April fools?:)

--- Comment #29 by DeedleFake ---
@scyth

I'm pretty sure that the [spaceship operator](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/45319) proposal is the April Fool's one, though I'm not entirely sure... 

--- Comment #30 by bserdar ---
@Merovius if having both `T` and `~T` is preparation for sum-types, then maybe using only `T` to mean "all types derived from T" when specifying constraints, and finding a different way to specify sum types could be a clearer choice.
