=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU4NzM1ODI0ODA= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/45899

==== [Issue Title] ====
io: add OffsetWriter, NewOffsetWriter

==== [Issue Body] ====
```go
CopyAt(dst WriterAt, src Reader, off int64) (written int64, err error)
CopyAtBuffer(dst WriterAt, src Reader, off int64, buf []byte) written int64, err error)

CopyFileRange(dst WriterAt, woff int64, src ReaderAt, roff int64) (written int64, err error)
```

or

```go
func NewSectionWriter(r WriterAt, off int64, n int64) *SectionWriter
func (s *SectionWriter) Write(p []byte) (n int, err error)
func (s *SectionWriter) WriteAt(p []byte, off int64) (n int, err error)
func (s *SectionWriter) Seek(offset int64, whence int) (int64, error)
func (s *SectionWriter) Size() int64
```

Helpful for concurrent writes.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by seankhliao ---
Where would this be used? does it come up often enough to be in the stdlib?

--- Comment #2 by nilsocket ---
@seankhliao 

- When downloading file concurrently using http ranges.
- Merging multiple files into one.
- Any use case where multiple go routines try to write concurrently at specific locations of a file.

Inconvenience with current implementations:
- `WriteAt()` needs to be wrapped in for loop with temporary buffer and need to keep track to check if everything is written.
- `WriteAt()` with buffer length equal to data being read, uses too much of memory.
- `Seek()`, using seek with multiple go routines isn't a valid option.

Better Performance for concurrent writes.
- Zero Copy functions like `ReadFrom()`, and `WriteTo()` can be used for concurrent writes, which is not possible now.

or another option would be to povide `ReadFromAt()` and `WriteToAt()`

In-case of `unix` `copyfilerange` is a system call, which exactly does this.

Thank you.

--- Comment #3 by ianlancetaylor ---
Note that we use the `copy_file_range` system call with `io.Copy` or more generally with `os.File.ReadFrom`.  But it's true that we currently always pass the offsets arguments as `nil`.

In `CopyAt` it's not immediately clear whether the `off` argument applies to the reader or the writer.  I can infer that it's the writer because the type is `WriterAt`.  But in general I think if we pass an offset for one we should pass an offset for both, which just gives us the `CopyFileRange` function.

I think in general having both `io.Copy` and `io.CopyBuffer` was a mistake, and I wouldn't want to repeat that mistake.

We already have `io.WriterAt` with a `WriteAt` method, and `os.File` already has a `WriteAt` method.  And you can already call that method concurrently from multiple goroutines.  So I don't have a clear handle on what new functionality we get from these new functions.

--- Comment #4 by nilsocket ---
> We already have `WriteAt`

Yes, But some book-keeping is needed. `WriteAt()` is similar to `write()`.

> I don't have a clear handle on what new functionality we get from these new functions.

Like `io.Copy()` for `Write()`, `io.CopyAt()` for `WriteAt()`

```go
// CopyBufferAt , copies `src` to `dst` at `off` using `buf`
//
// copied from io.copyBuffer
func CopyBufferAt(dst io.WriterAt, src io.Reader, off int64, buf []byte) (written int64, err error) {
	for {
		nr, er := src.Read(buf)
		if nr > 0 {
			nw, ew := dst.WriteAt(buf[0:nr], off+written)
			if nw < 0 || nr < nw {
				nw = 0
				if ew == nil {
					ew = errors.New("invalid write result")
				}
			}
			written += int64(nw)
			if ew != nil {
				err = ew
				break
			}
			if nr != nw {
				err = io.ErrShortWrite
				break
			}
		}
		if er != nil {
			if er != io.EOF {
				err = er
			}
			break
		}
	}
	return written, err
}
```

As for my limited understanding goes,
Currently it's not possible to do zero copy operations at specific locations.
If this feature is added, it would be good.

Thank you.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
Adding more variants of Copy seems like a mistake, as others have noted.
Adding SectionWriter to match [SectionReader](https://pkg.go.dev/io#SectionReader) seems plausible.
Does anyone object to adding SectionWriter?


--- Comment #6 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #7 by ianlancetaylor ---
Does a call to `NewSectionWriter(w, off, n)` imply that the size of `w` will always become at least `off` + `n`?  Or does it depend on subsequent writes?  Or is it an error if the size is not already at least `off` + `n`?

--- Comment #8 by nilsocket ---
@ianlancetaylor

I don't think `n` is necessary here.

I just copied definitions from `SectionReader` and changed it to `SectionWriter`.

Edit:

Taking cue from `NewSectionReader()`:
- For `NewSectionReader()`, `off` represents the starting point and `n` ending point, on trying to read further than `n` results in `io.EOF`. Thus representing a section from `off` to `n`.
- For `NewSectionWriter()`, `off` represents the starting point and `n` ending point, on trying to write further than `n` results in error `x`. Thus representing a section from `off` to `n`.

If `n` is to stay, then what error should `NewSectionWriter()` return, should a new error be defined?

If `n` is removed from `NewSectionWriter()`, and allows writes to go as further as user needs it.
Should it still be called `SectionWriter`, as it doesn't represent **section** anymore.

I think `n` should stay, and a new error be defined.

--- Comment #9 by ianlancetaylor ---
If `n` should stay, then I think you need to answer my earlier questions:

> Does a call to NewSectionWriter(w, off, n) imply that the size of w will always become at least off + n? Or does it depend on subsequent writes? Or is it an error if the size is not already at least off + n?

Thanks.

--- Comment #10 by nilsocket ---
It depends on subsequent writes.

--- Comment #11 by ghost ---
> It depends on subsequent writes.

How would that be helpful for concurrent writes, then?

--- Comment #12 by nilsocket ---
@opennota

Isn't this going to work?

```go
func main() {
	var length, ps, i int64 = 1000000, 100000, 0
	f, _ := os.Create("file")

	for ; i < length; i += ps {

		go func(from, to int64) {
			req, _ := http.NewRequest(http.MethodGet, "https://someurl.com/file", nil)

			setRange(req, from, to)
			resp, _ := http.DefaultClient.Do(req)

			nw := io.NewSectionWriter(f, from, to)
			io.Copy(nw, resp.Body)
			resp.Body.Close()
		}(i, i+ps)
	}
}

func setRange(req *http.Request, start, end int64) {
	req.Header.Set("Range", fmt.Sprintf("bytes=%d-%d", start, end-1))
}
```

--- Comment #13 by rsc ---
It's true, you don't seem to need n (the section length). But that makes it not really a SectionWriter but more like an OffsetWriter. That's fine of course.



--- Comment #14 by rsc ---
OK so it sounds like the API is:

```
// An OffsetWriter maps writes at offset o to offset o+off in the underlying writer.
type OffsetWriter struct { }

func NewOffsetWriter(r WriterAt, off int64) *OffsetWriter
func (s *OffsetWriter) Write(p []byte) (n int, err error)
func (s *OffsetWriter) WriteAt(p []byte, off int64) (n int, err error)
func (s *OffsetWriter) Seek(offset int64, whence int) (int64, error)
```

Do I have that right? Does anyone object to this? 

--- Comment #15 by nilsocket ---
> Does anyone object to this? 

Personally no.

--- Comment #16 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #17 by kortschak ---
Just clairfying, the offsets in these methods end up being on top of the original offset used to create the `*OffsetWriter`, correct?
```
func (s *OffsetWriter) WriteAt(p []byte, off int64) (n int, err error)
func (s *OffsetWriter) Seek(offset int64, whence int) (int64, error)
```

--- Comment #18 by nilsocket ---
@kortschak 

> on top of the original offset?

I'm not sure what do mean by `on top of` but if you mean relatively, yes.

```go
NewOffsetWriter(x, 10)

WriteAt(y, 10) // y is written at offset 20 of x.
```



--- Comment #19 by kortschak ---
> but if you mean relatively, yes.

Yes. Thanks.

--- Comment #20 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #21 by gopherbot ---
Change https://go.dev/cl/406776 mentions this issue: `io: add OffsetWriter, NewOffsetWriter`

--- Comment #22 by nightlyone ---
Sadly I didn't see this proposal while it was still in the comments period. This API is supposed to help with concurrent writes in the multi section download. Since the upper bound of the file write is not limited anymore this looks very dangerous to use.

I fear it will lead to concurrent writes to overlapping file sections, probably resulting in file corruptions.

@rsc / @ianlancetaylor could you please reconsider this API addition before it gets implemented or do I overlook something? The original API with sections seemed much safer to me.

--- Comment #23 by ianlancetaylor ---
@nightlyone Perhaps we should separate `OffsetWriter` from `LimitedWriter`.

--- Comment #24 by nilsocket ---
> Since the upper bound of the file write is not limited anymore this looks very dangerous to use.
I fear it will lead to concurrent writes to overlapping file sections, probably resulting in file corruptions.

But, it is similar to other api's like `WriteAt()`, user can make a mistake anywhere.
I think it is the responsibility of user to be careful.

Another possible solution, is to wrap your source (reader) with `LimitReader`.

```go
nw := io.NewOffsetWriter(f, from)
io.Copy(nw, io.LimitReader(resp.Body, n))
```
