=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU5NDkyNzAyNTE= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/47308

==== [Issue Title] ====
cmd/go: support for Git LFS via new VCS qualifier

==== [Issue Body] ====
## Background

* When Git LFS is installed on the client machine, `cmd/go` can work well with Git LFS, but only when using modules not via GOPROXY and GOPATH packages (called "packages" hereon for brevity).

* When Git LFS is not installed, `go get` will download the repository but not smudge, so any files stored in Git LFS are left as text-file refs.  This can break builds when such files are required for the build (e.g. binary syso files).

* The Google-hosted `proxy.golang.org` uses `cmd/go` to download package contents.  That service does not have Git LFS installed, and so every module retrieved via the proxy lacks Git LFS content.  This can break builds, and can also result in checksum mismatches when a user tries to verify a module they previously downloaded using `cmd/go` in direct mode while having Git LFS installed.

* For further detailed background information, see #47241.

## Proposal

1. A new VCS named `git-lfs` that prescribes the use of Git LFS when fetching a Git repo.

2. New `cmd/go` support for the new VCS: using a built-in Git LFS client implementation, or one that relies on Git LFS installed on the client machine.  For the latter:

    * If not installed, `cmd/go` should inform the user that Git LFS is required before erroring out.  i.e. `cmd/go` should never leave un-smudged Git LFS ref files in a fetched package.
    
    * Have Git LFS installed on `proxy.golang.org`.

3. Module (package) owners opt-in to mandatory Git LFS package retrieval using the following:

    * Specifying `git-lfs` as the `vcs` argument in the `content` attribute of the [go-import meta tag](https://golang.org/ref/mod#vcs-find).

    * Using the new VCS qualifier,

        * in the `module` directive in a `go.mod` file, e.g. `module go.jpap.org/example.git-lfs`.

            Here the `.git-lfs` suffix forms part of the module path when used with the [GOPROXY protocol](https://golang.org/ref/mod#goproxy-protocol) and the local module caches (`$GOPATH/pkg/mod`).

        * in the import comment in a package, e.g. `package example // import "go.jpap.org/example.git-lfs"`.

        In both cases above, the `.git-lfs` suffix should be ignored when matching the module path (package import path) against an `import` statement in a Go source file.  With reference to the examples above, the Go source having import statement `import "go.jpap.org/example"` should match even though it does not specify the VCS qualifier.

4. Module (package) users can explicitly qualify a module path (package import path) using the proposed VCS so that Git LFS is used to access the repository.  This is helpful when there is no `go-import` HTTP server available to resolve the repository URL.

5. Where Git LFS is installed, explicitly disable smudging on `cmd/go` fetches of modules (packages) not opted into the `git-lfs` VCS qualifier as outlined in Item 3.  This prevents the checksum mismatch problem outlined in #47241.

6. Irrespective of whether Git LFS is installed, when fetching a module (package) `cmd/go` should error out when it detects that a package has opted into Git LFS and the VCS qualifier is not `git-lfs`.  This forces module (package) users to also opt-in to using Git LFS, and prevents broken builds due to files not being smudged appropriately when Git LFS is not installed.


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
CC @bcmills @jayconrod 

--- Comment #2 by bcmills ---
> in the import comment in a package, e.g. `package example // import "go.jpap.org/example.git-lfs"`.

FWIW, import comments are ignored in module mode. If this behavior falls out naturally from the implementation that's fine, but I think the only places we should explicitly support the extension are in the module path:
```
$ go get go.jpap.org/example.git-lfs/cmd/example
```
and in the `go-import` metadata:
```html
<meta name="go-import" content="go.jpap.org/example git-lfs https://github.com/jpap/example.git">
```
.

--- Comment #3 by bcmills ---
> When fetching a module (package), `cmd/go` should "upgrade" to Git LFS when it detects that the package has opted into Git LFS. In that case, the module path (package import path) should be treated as if the user had appended the `.git-lfs` suffix.

I don't think we should do this part — it's too much of a special case — but I _do_ agree that we need to provide a smoother migration path for existing projects that don't control the `go-import` metadata for their import path, such as users with `github.com` import paths.

(I'm actively working on a proposal for a more general solution to the “renamed module path” use-case, so stay tuned!)

--- Comment #4 by bcmills ---
All in all, though, I agree that adding a `git-lfs` VCS type seems like the cleanest path forward, and explicitly disabling LFS for the regular `git` VCS type is the least likely to break existing checksums.

--- Comment #5 by jpap ---
> > in the import comment in a package, e.g. `package example // import "go.jpap.org/example.git-lfs"`.
> 
> FWIW, import comments are ignored in module mode. If this behavior falls out naturally from the implementation that's fine, but I think the only places we should explicitly support the extension are in the module path:

That was specified in support of GOPATH packages.  I understand that GOPATH is deprecated, but is it going to be removed and become strictly unsupported?

> > ["upgrade" stuff] 
>
> I don't think we should do this part — it's too much of a special case...

I don't feel strongly about that: I've dropped Item 5 of the proposal, and appended an "error out" item in its place.

> ... but I _do_ agree that we need to provide a smoother migration path for existing projects that don't control the `go-import` metadata for their import path, such as users with `github.com` import paths.
>
> (I'm actively working on a proposal for a more general solution to the “renamed module path” use-case, so stay tuned!)

You mentioned this back in #47241 -- are you able to outline some of what you had in mind for those like me who are curious?  I hope this is related to #39536!



--- Comment #6 by bcmills ---
> That was specified in support of GOPATH packages. I understand that GOPATH is deprecated, but is it going to be removed and become strictly unsupported?

We're not doing new feature work on it, and don't plan to. I think we should implement `git-lfs` support in module mode, and if that happens to also make it work in `GOPATH` mode all the better — but we shouldn't do extra work (or define extra semantics) just to support the new protocol in the old mode.

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
/cc @bcmills @matloob 

--- Comment #9 by bcmills ---
I think we should accept this. Specifically:
* `git-lfs` is treated as a new, independent VCS, meaning “Git with LFS definitely enabled, and fail if it isn't supported”
* `git` is treated as “Git with LFS explicitly disabled” (as `proxy.golang.org` does implicitly today by virtue of not having LFS installed)

I don't think we should try to detect when a repo served as `git` is configured for LFS — those repos may already exist and happen to work today and we shouldn't break them.

That does leave the hard-coded hosting providers like `github.com` in a bit of an awkward state, in that users can't seamlessly migrate them from `git` to `git-lfs` without changing the module path. But I think we can address that separately with follow-up proposals (#26134 is related, and #26904 may be sufficient once the `.git-lfs` suffix is recognized).

--- Comment #10 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #11 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group

