=== Fetching Proposal: MDU6SXNzdWU5NTg3Mzk3NjU= ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/47510

==== [Issue Title] ====
x/net/idna: add pre-defined profile for non-transitional IDNA2008

==== [Issue Body] ====
### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
$ go version
go version go1.16.6 linux/amd64
</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?

Yes

### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?

<details><summary><code>go env</code> Output</summary><br><pre>
$ go env

GO111MODULE=""
GOARCH="amd64"
GOBIN=""
GOCACHE="/home/***/.cache/go-build"
GOENV="/home/***/.config/go/env"
GOEXE=""
GOFLAGS=""
GOHOSTARCH="amd64"
GOHOSTOS="linux"
GOINSECURE=""
GOMODCACHE="/home/***/go/pkg/mod"
GONOPROXY=""
GONOSUMDB=""
GOOS="linux"
GOPATH="/home/***/go"
GOPRIVATE=""
GOPROXY="https://proxy.golang.org,direct"
GOROOT="/usr/lib/go"
GOSUMDB="sum.golang.org"
GOTMPDIR=""
GOTOOLDIR="/usr/lib/go/pkg/tool/linux_amd64"
GOVCS=""
GOVERSION="go1.16.6"
GCCGO="gccgo"
AR="ar"
CC="gcc"
CXX="g++"
CGO_ENABLED="1"
GOMOD="/dev/null"
CGO_CFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_CPPFLAGS=""
CGO_CXXFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_FFLAGS="-g -O2"
CGO_LDFLAGS="-g -O2"
PKG_CONFIG="pkg-config"
GOGCCFLAGS="-fPIC -m64 -pthread -fmessage-length=0 -fdebug-prefix-map=/tmp/go-build***=/tmp/go-build -gno-record-gcc-switches"
</pre></details>

### What did you do?

<!--
If possible, provide a recipe for reproducing the error.
A complete runnable program is good.
A link on play.golang.org is best.
-->
https://play.golang.org/p/zSGcE1no8yN
```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"

	"golang.org/x/net/idna"
)

func main() {
	eszett, _ := idna.Lookup.ToASCII("ß")
	fmt.Printf("ß => %s", eszett)
}
```

### What did you expect to see?

I wish that `ß` was kept as `ß` as in Firefox and Safari.

```
ß => ß
```

I am currently using the `idna` package to develop DNS-related tools (https://github.com/favonia/cloudflare-ddns), and I hope there is a predefined profile that uses **non-transitional** IDNA2008 processing. Despite the warnings that the actual `Lookup` profile could evolve over time, I understand that current software could rely on its specific behavior. Therefore, I propose adding a new profile `IDNA2008Lookup` or `NontransitionalLookup` (or some other good name---I am not a native English speaker anyways) as follows:
```go
IDNA2008Lookup = &Profile{options{
	transitional: false,
	useSTD3Rules: true,
	checkHyphens: true,
	checkJoiners: true,
	trie:         trie,
	fromPuny:     validateFromPunycode,
	mapping:      validateAndMap,
	bidirule:     bidirule.ValidString,
}}
```
Alternatively, the `idna` can provide new methods to create new profiles from the existing ones. It would then be trivial to create such a profile from existing `Lookup` profile (especially after the bugfix https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/text/+/317729/ is merged). Here is the pseudocode demonstrating the idea:

```go
func main() {
	eszett, _ := idna.Lookup.Derive(idna.Transitional(false)).ToASCII("ß")
	fmt.Printf("ß => %s", eszett)
}
```

### What did you see instead?

`ß` is mapped to `ss`, as in Chrome/Chromium.
```
ß => ss
```
The `Lookup` profile currently implements what's called _transitional processing_ in Unicode TS #46. It is the current behavior of Chrome/Chromium, though there is an [open issue discussing a possible switch](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=694157).

### Related Issues

This is closely related to #46001, which proposed to change the default behavior of `net/http`. I like #46001 very much, but chose to propose something more conservative in case there's any objection to #46001. This proposal merely adds a new helpful definition to facilitate non-transitional processing. Whether #46001 should be accepted or in general whether the standard library and other libraries should change their behaviors is out of the scope of this issue, though those changes would probably benefit from this proposal. I strongly believe the Go language should make it easy to write software using non-transitional IDNA2008 processing even if the standard library sticks to the current behavior.

### Further Justification

It is true that one can already define desirable profiles by carefully combining the correct set of options. I found the construction very unintuitive and strongly prefer a predefined profile ready to use.

### Implementation Details and Auxiliary Changes 

Introducing a new profile should be trivial. In fact, the above quoted code is almost all the necessary changes (modulo documentation and testing). Relatedly, the comment `It is used by most browsers when resolving domain names.` for `Transitional` is no longer accurate and should also be changed, in my opinion.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by seankhliao ---
cc @neild @ianlancetaylor

--- Comment #2 by favonia ---
Updates: I added the Playground link and the pseudocode demonstrating the alternative approach.

--- Comment #3 by neild ---
Is this different than the following?

```go
IDNA2000Lookup = idna.New(
  idna.MapForLookup(),
  idna.BidiRule(),
)
```

--- Comment #4 by favonia ---
> Is this different than the following?
> 
> ```go
> IDNA2000Lookup = idna.New(
>   idna.MapForLookup(),
>   idna.BidiRule(),
> )
> ```

Technically, it's the same. However, in terms of library user experience, it is quite different. I am confident in answering your question only because I have read through the entire file. I still remember that when I first checked the `idna` package I was very confused by the 10 different options where some seem to imply the others. For example, it was not clear to me that `MapForLookup` is a superset of `ValidateLabels` until I checked the source code. In fact, the documentation gave me the opposite impression that `ValidateLabels` could have done more than `MapForLookup`. It is also strange that I could not specifically turn off `BidiRule`.

A ready-to-use profile for IDNA2008 would save my past self lots of time, and this proposal is from the perspective of a new user of this library. I feel pre-defined profiles for common cases would encourage correct usage of the library and have values on their own even if, after knowing all the bits of this library, they could be defined in terms of current options. This is what I meant by "unintuitive" in my proposal. I would never know some combination is _correct_ until I read the source code.

If I may, I really wanted to replace the `Profile` with bit flags and clearly define those composite options as bitwise-ors of other flags. However, I decided to maintain maximum backward compatibility in this proposal. If the maintainers of this library are in favor of such a radical reform (e.g., ``type Profile int``), I will then agree that a user should be able to figure out the correct combinations by themselves with the new interface.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
Perhaps we should put @neild's example explicitly into the docs?


--- Comment #6 by neild ---
Perhaps the docs should specify exactly how each profile is constructed.

```
// Lookup is the recommended profile for looking up domain names, according
// to Section 5 of RFC 5891. The exact configuration of this profile may
// change over time.
//
// The current configuration is equivalent to:
//   idna.NewProfile(
//     idna.MapForLookup(),
//     idna.BidiRule(),
//     idna.Transitional(true),
//   )
Lookup *Profile = lookup
```

Or we could change the var definition, at the expense of needing to initialize the profile at init time rather than statically:

```
Lookup = New(
  idna.MapForLookup(),
  idna.BidiRule(),
  idna.Transitional(true),
)
```

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #8 by neild ---
I have no strong opinion on whether we should add a predefined nontransitional lookup profile, but if we do I suggest `NontransitionalLookup` or `LookupNontransitional` as the name. `IDNA2008Lookup` isn't correct, because the `idna` package as a whole implements IDNA2008.

--- Comment #9 by favonia ---
> Perhaps the docs should specify exactly how each profile is constructed.

Thank you, I think I can be satisfied with this (especially after <https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/text/+/317729/> is merged) because it clearly shows how I can create non-transitional versions of existing profiles. I am also happy with any of suggested names for the new profile (if we decide to add a new one).

--- Comment #10 by rsc ---
It's unclear how #46001 will play out, but the fact that it's a question suggests that having the table available from an easy-to-call function (instead of having to copy an example) is probably worth doing. 

(A function with an internal sync.Once seems better than a global var, to avoid init-time overhead for unused things.)





--- Comment #11 by rsc ---
Looking at the definition of Profile, it has multiple methods we'd have to expose if we didn't expose the Profile itself. 
And it only contains plain data, so we should be able to write a literal that the linker would drop if unused.
So exporting the Profile seems fine.

The docs for Lookup say it may change from time to time. Is it time to change it to non-transitional?
If we resolve that #46001 should change, then maybe we should implement that by changing idna.Lookup here?

We could still define idna.Transitional and idna.NonTransitional for people who want an explicit choice.

It's also unclear whether Display, Registration, and Punycode need to change at the same time. 
Any ideas?

/cc @mpvl 



--- Comment #12 by neild ---
> The docs for Lookup say it may change from time to time. Is it time to change it to non-transitional?

If #46001 resolves in favor of using nontransitional processing in `net/http`, we should do that by changing `idna.Lookup`.

I do not believe Display, Registration, and Punycode need to change. Transitional processing only affects the lookup profile. (The docs for [`idna.Transitional`](https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/net/idna#Transitional) state: "This option is only meaningful if combined with MapForLookup.")

--- Comment #13 by rsc ---
OK, sounds like this is blocked on #46001.


--- Comment #14 by rsc ---
#46001 is a likely accept, so I suppose this one is too (changing the default idna.Lookup).


--- Comment #15 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #16 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #17 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/359634 mentions this issue: `internal/export/idna: use nontransitional processing in Go 1.18`

--- Comment #18 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/360381 mentions this issue: `idna: update from x/text`

--- Comment #19 by TimothyGu ---
N.B., this has been fixed in 77c473f4197b5ad4d90689d665534e598f3c0750 for Go 1.18, which changes the pre-defined Lookup profile to be non-transitional.
