=== Fetching Proposal: I_kwDOAWBuf85HBA5Y ===
Issue URL: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/52132

==== [Issue Title] ====
x/crypto/ssh: add MultiAlgorithmSigner

==== [Issue Body] ====
Currently Go's SSH package doesn't permit a server to disable some host keys algorithms, for example if you provide an RSA host key we can't disable `ssh-rsa` which use sha1 and is disabled by default in recent versions of OpenSSH.

I propose adding a `HostKeyAlgorithms` string list to the ServerConfig similar to the one already available for the ClientConfig:

```
// A list of enabled host key algorithms. If unspecified then a sensible
// default is used.
HostKeyAlgorithms []string
```

I have submitted a [PR](https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/crypto/+/396394) that implement this new feature. This is the proposal for the API change. 


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
CC @rolandshoemaker @golang/security 

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
cc @golang/security 


--- Comment #4 by rolandshoemaker ---
Adding support for restricting the algorithms seems reasonable. I'd err on the side of doing this at the point of adding a host key, rather than adding a configurable list in ServerConfig though, since it would allow us to prevent the circumstance where the user configures a server which has no supported algorithms for the set of configured host keys.

Something along the lines of `func (s *ServerConfig) AddHostKeyWithAlgos(key Signer, []string) error` would allow adding a host key with only a specific set of algorithms enabled, and would allow us to verify that at least one viable algorithm was configured. The implementation would be somewhat more complex (although not terribly so), but would be somewhat harder to use incorrectly.

cc @FiloSottile who most recently mucked around in the SSH code, and likely has stronger opinions about the cleanest way to do this.

--- Comment #5 by drakkan ---
@rolandshoemaker only for info, currently the library does not perform any consistency check, for example we can start an ssh server without host keys (well get the `server has no host keys` error at runtime ) or we can set an unsupported MAC (with run-time panic if the client selects it). 

I could try to write a patch to add the `func (s *ServerConfig) AddHostKeyWithAlgos(key Signer, []string) error` method and I can populate the allowed host key algorithms there.

@FiloSottile  do you have other suggestions? Thanks


--- Comment #6 by FiloSottile ---
The core issue is that Signer doesn't advertise what algorithms it supports. This is also a backwards compatibility issue because if we add support for an algorithm, all Signers with a compatible public key need to get updated or they'll break.

A better solution I think would be to extend the AlgorithmSigner interface with another interface upgrade (MultiAlgorithmSigner? AlgorithmSignerWithAlgorithms?) that includes a method that reports the algorithms supported by that signer.

It would also solve #36261 because the order of the returned algorithms would allow specifying a preference order. This previously came up in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/39885#issuecomment-943101689. See also https://github.com/golang/crypto/blob/2c7772ba30643b7a2026cbea938420dce7c6384d/ssh/handshake.go#L461-L469 and golang/crypto@1baeb1ce4c0b006eff0f294c47cb7617598dfb3d.

--- Comment #7 by drakkan ---
Thanks,

so we could add a new interface like this:

```
// MultiAlgorithmSigner is an AlgorithmSigner that also reports the algorithms
// supported by that signer
type MultiAlgorithmSigner interface {
	AlgorithmSigner

	// Algorithms returns the available algorithms
	Algorithms() []string
}
```

and a new method to get an `AlgorithmSigner` restricted to the specified algos

```
// NewSignerWithAlgos returns a signer restricted to the specified algorithms.
// It returns an error if the specified algorithms are incompatible with the
// public key type
func NewSignerWithAlgos(signer AlgorithmSigner, algorithms []string) (Signer, error) 
```

library users who want to restrict algorithms can use this new method and pass the returned signer to the existing `AddHostKey` method.

We could also implement the `Algorithms() []string` method for all the existing `AlgorithmSigner` implementations returning all the supported algos for the specified key types.

This way in the server handshake we should be able do something like this:

```
if signer, ok := k.(MultiAlgorithmSigner); ok {
    msg.ServerHostKeyAlgos = append(msg.ServerHostKeyAlgos, signer.Algorithms()...)
} else {
   msg.ServerHostKeyAlgos = append(msg.ServerHostKeyAlgos, keyFormat)
}
```

alternatively we can check for both `MultiAlgorithmSigner` and `AlgorithmSigner` here.

If this is ok I can send a new patch, thanks

--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
I'm not sure this discussion is converging. @rolandshoemaker or @FiloSottile any thoughts on whether we want to add more implicit interfaces here?


--- Comment #9 by FiloSottile ---
https://github.com/golang/go/issues/52132#issuecomment-1124004750 is consistent with what I was suggesting in https://github.com/golang/go/issues/52132#issuecomment-1119737637 and I like the `NewSignerWithAlgos` addition. We should make sure it also solves #36261, but I think it should.


--- Comment #10 by drakkan ---
@FiloSottile thanks.

A patch is here:

https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/crypto/+/409215

it would be great if someone could also review my patch that adds server side support for RFC 8308:

https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/crypto/+/396714

This patch is included in SFTPGo since v2.2.3, no complaints so far. Thanks!

--- Comment #11 by rsc ---
It's a little odd to see both Algorithms and Algos (spellings) in the API. There are no "Algos" in the current go/api/*.txt files. Probably we should spell it out?

Otherwise, it sounds like people are OK with https://github.com/golang/go/issues/52132#issuecomment-1124004750?


--- Comment #12 by drakkan ---
@rsc thanks. I have renamed `NewSignerWithAlgos` to `NewSignerWithAlgorithms`. Please let me know if any other changes are needed

--- Comment #13 by rsc ---
@drakkan I don't see where you renamed NewSignerWithAlgos. https://github.com/golang/go/issues/52132#issuecomment-1124004750 still says that. Can you post a new comment below with the full list of API changes? Thanks!


--- Comment #14 by drakkan ---
@rsc I updated the patch implementing this proposal

https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/crypto/+/409215

here are the (public) API changes

```
// MultiAlgorithmSigner is an AlgorithmSigner that also reports the algorithms
// supported by that signer
type MultiAlgorithmSigner interface {
	AlgorithmSigner

	// Algorithms returns the available algorithms in preference order
	Algorithms() []string
}

// NewSignerWithAlgorithms returns a signer restricted to the specified algorithms.
// The algorithms must be set in preference order.
// An error is returned if the specified algorithms are incompatible with the
// public key type.
func NewSignerWithAlgorithms(signer AlgorithmSigner, algorithms []string) (Signer, error)
```

thanks

--- Comment #15 by FiloSottile ---
Any reason for `NewSignerWithAlgorithms` not to return a `MultiAlgorithmSigner`?

--- Comment #16 by drakkan ---
> Any reason for `NewSignerWithAlgorithms` not to return a `MultiAlgorithmSigner`?

No particular reason. I will update the patch, thanks

--- Comment #17 by drakkan ---
@FiloSottile [patch](https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/crypto/+/409215) updated, here are the updated API:

```
// MultiAlgorithmSigner is an AlgorithmSigner that also reports the algorithms
// supported by that signer
type MultiAlgorithmSigner interface {
	AlgorithmSigner

	// Algorithms returns the available algorithms in preference order
	Algorithms() []string
}

// NewSignerWithAlgorithms returns a signer restricted to the specified algorithms.
// The algorithms must be set in preference order.
// An error is returned if the specified algorithms are incompatible with the
// public key type.
func NewSignerWithAlgorithms(signer AlgorithmSigner, algorithms []string) (MultiAlgorithmSigner, error)
```

--- Comment #18 by rsc ---
Thanks @drakkan. Does anyone object to this API?


--- Comment #19 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #20 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
This issue now tracks the work of implementing the proposal.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #21 by gopherbot ---
Change https://go.dev/cl/508398 mentions this issue: `ssh: add MultiAlgorithmSigner`
