==== [Issue Title] ====
cmd/vet: flag using %s:%d to construct network addresses

==== [Issue Body] ====
I recently diagnosed a bug in someone’s Go program where a user reported that they couldn’t get the program to connect, and it turned out the issue was that the programmer used `fmt.Sprintf("%s:%d", host, port)` instead of `net.JoinHostPort` to construct a network address to pass to `net.Dial`: https://twitter.com/zekjur/status/1049642773278650368. The issue is subtle: `net.JoinHostPort` correctly handles IPv6 address literals (e.g. 2001:4860:4860::8888), whereas fmt.Sprintf doesn’t.

A very similar issue is to use `strings.Split` instead of `net.SplitHostPort`.

I noticed that both of these issues are fairly prevalent, likely because programmers aren’t that accustomed to using IPv6 literals yet, but I expect them to become more common as IPv6 adoption continues to grow.

I propose adding a vet check to flag using %s:%d format strings with arguments whose names contain port, addr, host, listen or bind. This heuristic will flag 12356 occurrences¹ I found on GitHub using BigQuery, and hopefully make programmers aware not only of net.JoinHostPort but also net.SplitHostPort, for which writing a check is significantly harder.

I can send a CL to implement this. Let me know what you think.

① The BigQuery query I used was:
```
WITH lines AS
  (SELECT
    id,
    SPLIT(content, "\n") AS line
  FROM `gocontents.gocontents`)
SELECT path, flattened_line
FROM lines
CROSS JOIN UNNEST(lines.line) AS flattened_line
JOIN `gocontents.gofiles` AS files ON files.id = lines.id
WHERE
  REGEXP_CONTAINS(flattened_line, r"fmt.Sprintf\(\"%s:%d\", (port|addr|host|listen|bind)")
```

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by mvdan ---
This definitely checks the correctness and frequency requirements for a vet check - the issue leads to bugs, and it happens often.

However, I'm not sure if it ticks off the precision requirement. If the check simply inspects the syntax tree, it could be prone to false positives or negatives. Dominik proposes a slightly different approach for his tooling in https://github.com/dominikh/go-tools/issues/358, for example.

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---
I agree that you want to look for fmt.Sprint output feeding into net.Dial, not variable names.
Otherwise it seems reasonable.


--- Comment #3 by rsc ---
It also seems like you'd want to find x+":"+z as a Dial argument.
Overall this seems doable in the same vein as the printf wrapper detector already in vet.

So it sounds like the next step would be to implement a check and see how well it does on the three vet criteria from cmd/vet/README.

Does anyone want to do that?



--- Comment #4 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #5 by egonelbre ---
You may want to look other variants of the format string: `%v:%v`, `%s:%v`, `%v:%d`.

--- Comment #6 by timothy-king ---
@rsc I can try making a checker for this.

--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
I grepped for `net.Dial.*(Sprintf|\+)` in my now year-old Go corpus and attach the 342 results.

[dials.txt.gz](https://github.com/golang/go/files/6127210/dials.txt.gz)


--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
I filed #44955 as a potential alternative to discuss: just accept %s:%d in Dial instead, at least for tcp and udp.

--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
Blocked on #44955.


--- Comment #10 by rsc ---
#44955 is retracted. Back to this.


--- Comment #11 by rsc ---
I don't see anyone objecting to adding this vet check. Are there any objections?


--- Comment #12 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #13 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
