==== [Issue Title] ====
runtime: automatically bump RLIMIT_NOFILE on Unix

==== [Issue Body] ====
I just read http://0pointer.net/blog/file-descriptor-limits.html which in a nutshell says:

* don't use `select`
* systemd sets the RLIMIT_NOFILE soft limit to 1024 for compatibility reasons, to not break `select` users
* systemd sets the RLIMIT_NOFILE hard limit 512K, for programs that want more (without escalation), but by raising their soft limit past 1024, they're implicitly acknowledging that `select` won't work.

I realize that since Go doesn't use select, the Go runtime could automatically do this fd soft limit bumping on Linux.

We do have a Select wrapper at https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/sys/unix#Select, though, so perhaps we could do the same thing we did for #42347 in 18510ae88ffcb9c4a914805fde3e613539f9b6dc (https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/go/+/299671) and do the bumping conditionally based on whether the `unix.Select` func is in the binary. Or `cgo` too, I suppose.

I suspect many users are unaware of this 512K hard limit that's free to bump up to. I certainly was unaware. (I normally have to go in and manual tweak my systemd limits instead, usually in response to problems once I hit the limit...)  I think fixing it automatically would help more users than it'd hurt. (I actually can't think how it'd hurt anybody?)

I don't think we need it as a backpressure mechanism. As the blog post mentions, memory limits are already that mechanism.

/cc @ianlancetaylor @aclements @rsc @randall77 

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
The limitation on `select` is not a kernel limitation.  It's a limitation on the implementation of `fd_set` in glibc.  And we've inherited that limitation in `x/sys/unix.FdSet`, but perhaps we could fix that.  If we did, then we could raise the soft limit to the hard limit unconditionally.

I note that on my Debian system the soft and hard limits are both `131072`.  On my CentOS 6 system the soft limit is `1024` and the hard limit is `4096`.  On my recent Fedora system the soft limit is `1024` and the hard limit is `524288`.

--- Comment #2 by bradfitz ---
Yeah, I saw `FdSet` was `struct { Bits [16]int64 }`. Make it opaque with a `[16]int64` used by default and a spill-over lazily-allocated bitmap when `(*FDSet).Set(fd int)` is called with a "big" fd? Doable, but I wonder if it's worth the effort. Does anybody actually use `unix.Select`?

We'd still need a conditional mechanism regardless for `cgo` I assume, as we wouldn't know whether C code was using select as easily?

FWIW, on my various Debian (buster) & Ubuntu (focal LTS, hirsute) machines here, I see 1024 & 1048576.

--- Comment #3 by bradfitz ---
> Does anybody actually use unix.Select?

GitHub code search says https://github.com/search?l=&p=2&q=unix.Select+language%3AGo&type=Code .... it's mostly wireguard-go's `rwcancel` package. 

(cc @zx2c4 as FYI)

--- Comment #4 by zx2c4 ---
~I'm happy to get rid of that and replace it with poll. (Want to send a patch?)~ Done: https://git.zx2c4.com/wireguard-go/commit/?id=a9b377e9e10eb5194c0bdff32136c11b17253bfd

This proposal sounds like a good idea, with the caveat that we probably shouldn't do it in initialization for -buildmode=shared.

--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
What happens today, even in programs that do nothing but file I/O (no select etc), is that if you open too many files you get errors. Auto-bumping would let those programs run longer.

If Go did it at startup, it would be inherited by non-Go programs that we fork+exec. That is a potential incompatibility, but probably not a large one. Technically, I suppose we could undo it in the subprocess between fork and exec.



--- Comment #6 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #7 by nightlyone ---
To summarize the limitating use cases where we should not be raising the soft limit.
* select implementation from glibc (or other libc like musl too?) is used
* cgo is used because dynamic linking can load anything with dlopen and also can cause exec calls in places we don't know.
* select implementation from our own syscalls or unix package is used, unless that one is changed as suggested above.
* NSS (user/group lookup and DNS lookup) is used from glibc.
* and we need to reset, if we call the exec family of syscalls

--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
One problem with restoring the limit in exec is we won't know if the limit was intentionally changed by the program in the interim. What about programs that explicitly raise the limit and then exec today? We would be dropping it back down.

It seems like if we are going to raise the limit, we should just do that, not try to put it back. 

I just ran into this problem with gofmt on my Mac, where the limit defaults to 256 (and gofmt was editing many files in parallel). I'd love for Go to raise the limit there too.

How much does it really matter if we raise the limit for a subprocess?

People can always set the hard limit if they want Go not to try to bump the soft limit up.

--- Comment #9 by rsc ---
It's pretty awful that the limit is breaking completely reasonable Go programs like gofmt -w. 
It seems very wrong for gofmt to have to put a bump in.
It seems like we should bump the limit at startup - Go doesn't use select.

It's very hard to see any programs benefiting from this limit in practice anymore.
I understand that systemd can't make such a global decision, but I think Go can.


--- Comment #10 by zx2c4 ---
I think that seems quite reasonable.

We can even document this in `unix.Select`/`syscall.Select` and mark them as deprecated so that editors bring attention to them and maybe add something to `go vet` too. It seems always possible to move to poll or similar.

--- Comment #11 by rsc ---
Not sure anyone is using syscall.Select for fd's anyway. 
Every time I've used it in the past decade it has been to get a sub-second-resolution sleeping API (selecting on no fds).


--- Comment #12 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #13 by AlekSi ---
Should the title be updated to mention Unix or something instead of Linux?
Personally, I constantly run into that limitation on macOS; would like to see that resolved.

--- Comment #14 by ianlancetaylor ---
The considerations may be different on different Unix systems.  On Linux the details are somewhat specific to systemd.

It may well be appropriate to do this on macOS also, but I don't know what the tradeoffs are there.  Why does macOS have a default low limit?

--- Comment #15 by AlekSi ---
From what I was able to find, that default goes back to the very first OS X release and probably even back to BSD. The constant is [there](https://github.com/apple-oss-distributions/xnu/blob/bb611c8fecc755a0d8e56e2fa51513527c5b7a0e/bsd/sys/param.h#L101).

Of course, not doing that on macOS is not a deal-breaker but an annoyance.

--- Comment #16 by kolyshkin ---
The only issue I am aware of that can arise if RLIMIT_NOFILE is set to a very high value is, some binaries (that may be executed from a Go program and thus inherit the limit) want to do something like this (pseudocode):
```go
for fd := 3; fd < getrlimit(RLIMIT_NOFILE); fd++ {
      close(fd) // or set CLOEXEC flag
}
```

For a specific example, `rpm` package manager used to do that (fixed by https://github.com/rpm-software-management/rpm/commit/5e6f05cd8dad6c1ee6bd1e6e43f176976c9c3416), and also some older version of Python (but I'm not sure).

Most probably this should not be an issue, since Docker also does a similar thing (https://github.com/moby/moby/issues/38814) and since everyone seems to be using containers now, let's hope that issues like this are fixed (yet better, maybe some programs have even started using `close_range()`).

Also, this is surely not a showstopper to accept the proposal -- just something to keep in mind.

--- Comment #17 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
