==== [Issue Title] ====
unicode/utf8: add AppendRune

==== [Issue Body] ====
The existing `utf8.EncodeRune` is not user friendly.

Analyzing all usages in the module proxy, usages fall into approximately two patterns.

### Pattern 1: encode and increment the total length
```go
var n int
b := make([]byte, ...) // make with a length that is hopefully large enough
for _, r := range ... {
    n += utf8.EncodeRune(b[n:], r)
}
return b[:n]
```
This pattern starts with a buffer that is large enough and then calls `utf8.EncodeRune` to directly write into the buffer and then increment the total known length.

This pattern is dangerous as it is especially prone to panicking. It assumes that `b[n:]` is always large enough (most code do not check to make sure that at least 4B available). Even worse, this is a bug that rarely manifests and is unlikely to occur unless the unit test writes a large number of multi-byte runes.

### Pattern 2: appending to a slice through intermediate array
```go
b := make(]byte, 0, ...) // optionally provide some capacity 
for _, r := range ... {
    var arr [utf8.UTFMax]
    n := utf8.EncodeRune(arr[:], r)
    b = append(b, arr[:n]...)
}
```
This pattern is much safer than pattern 1 in that it never panics. However, it 1) incurs a performance penalty encoding into an intermediate array that is then appended to the primary buffer, and 2) requires 3 lines of code instead of just 1.

### Prevalence

Between the two common patterns:
* at least ~25% are pattern 1,
* at least ~15% are pattern 2, and
* the remaining ~60% seem to be mostly either pattern 1 or pattern 2, but unfortunately my simple pattern matcher failed to classify them.

### Proposal

Since both pattern 1 and 2 are both ultimately concerned with appending into a slice, I propose the addition of:
```go
// AppendRune appends the UTF-8 encoding of r into p.
func AppendRune(p []byte, r rune) []byte
```

The signature matches many other append-like APIs in the standard library (e.g., `strconv.AppendFloat`).

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by rsc ---
/cc @robpike 

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #3 by robpike ---
This does seem reasonable. Thanks @dsnet for doing the scan of the libraries: that makes the case.

--- Comment #4 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #5 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
