==== [Issue Title] ====
crypto/tls: expose all presented certs in error type on handshake failure

==== [Issue Body] ====
<!--
Please answer these questions before submitting your issue. Thanks!
For questions please use one of our forums: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/Questions
-->

### What version of Go are you using (`go version`)?

<pre>
$ go version
1.14.12
</pre>

### Does this issue reproduce with the latest release?
Not sure


### What operating system and processor architecture are you using (`go env`)?
BusyBox OS, ARM architecture
<details><summary><code>go env</code> Output</summary><br><pre>
$ go env

</pre></details>

### What did you do?

<!--
If possible, provide a recipe for reproducing the error.
A complete runnable program is good.
A link on play.golang.org is best.
-->
This is related to another issue https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48151#issue-986761070


### What did you expect to see?



### What did you see instead?


==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by seankhliao ---
cc @FiloSottile 

--- Comment #2 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #3 by FiloSottile ---
Generally this sounds good. What's the proposed API? An error wrapper type for certificate validation failure that includes the peer certificates? Should it also be raise on a failed VerifyPeerCertificates or VerifyConnection?

How is this different from #48151 and why does that issue say "it's done wrong for client certificates"? We could generally use a more detailed "what did you do" / "what did you expect" / "what did you see".

--- Comment #4 by rsc ---
Ping @ptagrawal for answers to @FiloSottile's questions.


--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
ping @ptagrawal 

--- Comment #6 by ptagrawal ---
_An error wrapper type for certificate validation failure that includes the peer certificates?_ 
Yes, because, this would help debug what certs were presented while trying to make the connection.

_Should it also be raise on a failed VerifyPeerCertificates or VerifyConnection?_ 
Not sure about this, but I believe, if VerifyPeerCertificate is set, its upto up to parse and verify the certificate which I guess, we could anyways do in case of an error. So, maybe not required. 

_How is this different from #48151 and why does that issue say "it's done wrong for client certificates"?_ 
So, I mentioned that because, looking at the logs I couldn't find the cert in the err.Error() where as the string preceeding that called out "failed to verify client certificate". I hoped the returned error would contain the certificate that was presented. 


--- Comment #7 by rsc ---
It sounds like the answer is to suggest a new error wrapper type that will hold the certificates and be returned on validation failure?

Alternately, is it possible to get this info using a custom VerifyPeerCertificates? Or is there no way to invoke the usual code in that case?


--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
/cc @golang/security 

--- Comment #9 by FiloSottile ---
You can do it with VerifyConnection/VerifyPeerCertificates, although you have to maintain some state at a higher lexical scope and it's kind of hard to associate a VerifyConnection/VerifyPeerCertificates invocation with an error returned by Handshake.

Assuming it's possible to unwrap the Handshake return value to get an error as returned by VerifyConnection/VerifyPeerCertificates, one can implement the certificate check there and return a wrapped error.

Still, setting InsecureSkipVerify to bypass the normal checks, then reimplementing them just to return an error wrapper to get access to the certificates is quite burdensome.

I wouldn't be opposed to a new error wrapper with an `UnverifiedCertificates` field, that can be accessed with errors.As.

--- Comment #10 by rsc ---
It sounds like we need an API, then, specifically a name for the error.

```
type UnverifiedCertificatesError struct {
    UnverifiedCertificates []*x509.Certificate
}

func (e *UnverifiedCertificatesError) Error() string { ... }
```

Is this the API?



--- Comment #11 by FiloSottile ---
Maybe the error name is `CertificateVerificationError`?

--- Comment #12 by rsc ---
OK, so it sounds like:

```
type CertificateVerificationError struct {
    UnverifiedCertificates []*x509.Certificate
}

func (e * CertificateVerificationError) Error() string { ... }
```

Does anyone object to that API?


--- Comment #13 by rsc ---
Does anyone object to the API in the preceding comment?


--- Comment #14 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #15 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
