==== [Issue Title] ====
spec: allow eliding interface{  } in constraint literals

==== [Issue Body] ====
I propose an additional rule for constraints in type parameter lists:

`[T nonInterfaceType]` ≡ `[T interface{~nonInterfaceType}]`

Rationale:

All functions of the proposed `maps` package (#47649) and most functions of the `slices` package (#45955, #47203) currently use constraints from the `constraints` package (#45458) for maximum generality.  A hypothetical `chans` package would probably be similar (there's already a proposal for `constraints.{ReadOnlyChan|WriteOnlyChan}`: #48366). Some excerpts:

    func EqualFunc[M1 constraints.Map[K, V1], M2 constraints.Map[K, V2], K comparable, V1, V2 any](m1 M1, m2 M2, cmp func(V1, V2) bool) bool

    func Clone[S constraints.Slice[T], T any](s S) S

With this proposal these would become:

    func EqualFunc[M1 map[K]V1, M2 map[K]V2, K comparable, V1, V2 any](m1 M1, m2 M2, cmp func(V1, V2) bool) bool

    func Clone[S []T, T any](s S) S

The benefit:

- `constraints.{Slice|Map|Chan|ReadOnlyChan|WriteOnlyChan}` would not be necessary at all.
- No visual incongruency between plain old Go types like `map[K]V`, `[]T`, `chan T`, `<-chan T`, `chan<- T` and their accompanying constraints.

This proposal stems from the discussion under https://github.com/golang/go/discussions/47330#discussioncomment-1332333

Summary:

```
  [M map[K]V, K comparable, V any]
≡ [M interface{~map[K]V}, K comparable, V any]
≡ [M constraints.Map[K, V], K comparable, V any]

  [S []T, T any]
≡ [S interface{~[]T}, T any]
≡ [S constraints.Slice[T], T any]

  [C <-chan T, T any]
≡ [C interface{~<-chan T}, T any]
≡ [C constraints.ReadOnlyChan[T], T any]

  [C chan<- T, T any]
≡ [C interface{~chan<- T}, T any]
≡ [C constraints.WriteOnlyChan[T], T any]

  [C chan T, T any]
≡ [C interface{~chan T}, T any]
≡ [C constraints.Chan[T], T any]
```



==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by ianlancetaylor ---
CC @griesemer 

--- Comment #2 by griesemer ---
This is an interesting idea and we had (internally to the Go team) discussed essentially the same thing: writing a type expression `X` in constraint position as syntactic sugar for `interface{X}`. I think there's something to it, but we haven't quite figured out (not have spent the time on) to determine how such an idea would fit smoothly in to the rest of the type system.

In any case, the proposal would have to be generalized a bit. For instance, we would want to say `int|string` instead of `interface{int|string}`. Also, it's not clear exactly when the `~` can be omitted and why.


--- Comment #3 by ianlancetaylor ---
If we do this, I don't think we should automatically insert a `~`.  That seems like unnecessary magic.  That would give us

```Go
func EqualFunc[M1 ~map[K]V1, M2 ~map[K]V2, K comparable, V1, V2 any](m1 M1, m2 M2, cmp func(V1, V2) bool) bool

func Clone[S ~[]T, T any](s S) S
```

--- Comment #4 by fzipp ---
In my imagination it's not "type set expression hoisted to type parameter list level", hence no | or ~. I intended to keep more complex and nuanced constraint definitions inside interfaces. I see it as "expand non-interface type into its sole useful constraint form". It is admittedly some amount of magic.

--- Comment #5 by fzipp ---
I know it's probably too late for syntax changes re. constraints, but I personally would have preferred this:

```
My preference                             Vs. current design

[T interface { M() }]                     [T interface { M() }]
[T nonInterfaceType]                      [T interface { ~nonInterfaceType }]
[T union {A|B|C}]                         [T interface { ~A|~B|~C }].               
[T interface { nonInterfaceType; M() }]   [T interface { ~nonInterfaceType; M() }] 
[T interface { union {A|B|C}; M() }]      [T interface { ~A|~B|~C; M() }] 
```

With `union` being a non-interface type as well. The rule would have been simple: non-interface types match approximately when used as constraints, and they match exactly when used as regular types:

```
var x nonInterfaceType
var x union { A|B|C }
```

No tilde, and types like `map[K]V` could act directly as `constraints.Map[K, V]` etc.


--- Comment #6 by ianlancetaylor ---
@fzipp If we want to make this change, let's keep this issue tightly focused on this specific change, not on a discussion of possible alternative syntaxes.  Thanks.

--- Comment #7 by griesemer ---
We might be able to say that a constraint is simply a type set. A type set may be expressed through an interface (as we do now), but it may _also_ be a type expression of the form `~T` or `A|B`. Additionally, we could say that an ordinary type T represents the type set `interface{T}` if we expect a type set. Syntactically, we'd have to allow type expressions of the form `~T` and `A|B` outside of an interface (in constraint position only).

Or, looking from a slightly different angle, we could say that writing `T`, `~T` , or `A|B` in constraint position is a form of syntactic sugar for `interface{T}`, `interface{~T}` , or `interface{A|B}`.


--- Comment #8 by rsc ---
Agree with @ianlancetaylor about the ~ not being tied to the shortening.
At that point [C X] and [C interface{X}] are just the same.

It's already the case that [C interface{X}] and [C interface{interface{X}}] are the same,
so that makes the shortening safe 100% of the time.

And it would let us remove constraints.Map, constraints.Slice, etc.
Those just get spelled '~' now, as in [M ~map[K]V].

@griesemer will prototype and prepare a CL showing the effect on code.



--- Comment #9 by fzipp ---
I'm ok with it if this is the preferred variant.

--- Comment #10 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #11 by benhoyt ---
This is definitely a readability win: I couldn't understand why the `constraints.Map[K, V]` thing was necessary at first at all, not to mention it'd be annoying to have to import and it takes up a lot of space. As a (newbie) code reader, to understand why it wasn't just `map[K]V`, you'd have to go to the `constraints` package docs, find the `Map` type, look at its definition, and notice the `~`. With this proposed syntax, you'd just have to understand what `~` means. (I do prefer it without the `~`, but I know what it means and can see the desire to avoid magically implying it.)

--- Comment #12 by akavel ---
@rsc I'm not tracking all the (apparently more numerous than I thought) proposals related to generics, so I'd like to ask, if that's ok: will the _discussion_ around this proposal _temporarily_ suspend introduction of the `constraints` package (until this one is decided)? I'm not sure what's the status of the latter, but it would feel weird if `constraints.Map` were e.g. to be introduced with Go 1.18, just to become insta-legacy if this one (#48424) doesn't make it to Go1.18 (or wherever generics are to be introduced) yet possibly lands in (say) Go1.19. (In fact, I'm kinda guessing that's probably one of the main reasons you got this one on such a fast track, still I'm curious if you'd be ok with some explicit statement on the relation between the two. Thanks!)

--- Comment #13 by ianlancetaylor ---
@akavel I'm confident that this proposal will be either accepted or declined before Go 1.18.  If accepted, we should then consider removing `constraints.Map`, `constraints.Slice`, and `constraints.Chan`.

--- Comment #14 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/353133 mentions this issue: `cmd/compile/internal/types2: allow eliding interface in constraint literals`

--- Comment #15 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/353139 mentions this issue: `cmd/compile/internal/types2: accept constraint literals with elided interfaces`

--- Comment #16 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/353389 mentions this issue: `cmd/compile: accept constraint literals with elided interfaces`

--- Comment #17 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/353395 mentions this issue: `x/tools/go/internal/gcimporter: exclude a file from TestImportTypeparamTests`

--- Comment #18 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/353396 mentions this issue: `cmd/compile/internal/types2: mark implicit interfaces as such`

--- Comment #19 by griesemer ---
This is now implemented in the compiler in the master branch at tip so we can explore this in practice. Note that **this proposal has not been accepted yet**, so don't write code that you expect to remain valid a month from now...

Only the compiler understands this notation at the moment, tools such as gofmt, vet, etc. cannot handle this yet.

If the proposal is not accepted, we can quickly disable the feature by changing a flag in the compiler.


--- Comment #20 by ianlancetaylor ---
Per https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48424#issuecomment-926171716, as part of this proposal we should explicitly remove `constraints.Slice`, `constraints.Map`, and `constraints.Chan`, which were added as part of #45458.  If this proposal is accepted, they are no longer needed.  They are in the current tree, but as they have not been part of any release we can still remove them.

--- Comment #21 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #22 by rogpeppe ---
Interestingly, if this is accepted, and we also [allow constraints as ordinary interface types](https://go.googlesource.com/proposal/+/refs/heads/master/design/43651-type-parameters.md#permitting-constraints-as-ordinary-interface-types) it might open the door to almost exactly the syntax proposed [here](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/19412#issuecomment-288485048). For example, we could express something that must be `[]byte` or `string` as `[]byte | string` rather than `interface{ []byte | string}`.


--- Comment #23 by earthboundkid ---
🤔 In a world with constraints as value types, optionals would be 

    type Maybe[T any] interface { T }
    
    var none Maybe[int] = nil
    var just Maybe[int] = 1

--- Comment #24 by rogpeppe ---
@carlmjohnson Personally I don't think that interface values that only admit a single type should admit nil as well, but I'm aware others have differing opinions about that.

--- Comment #25 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/354870 mentions this issue: `go/parser: allow eliding interface in constraint literals`

--- Comment #26 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/354991 mentions this issue: `go/types: mark implicit interfaces as such`

--- Comment #27 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/354989 mentions this issue: `go/types: accept constraint literals with elided interfaces`

--- Comment #28 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/354990 mentions this issue: `go/internal/gcimporter: enable importing typeparam/issue48424.go`

--- Comment #29 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
