==== [Issue Title] ====
os/exec: improved API and default behavior for the PWD env variable

==== [Issue Body] ====
### Background

On POSIX platforms, the [`PWD` environment variable](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/basedefs/V1_chap08.html#tag_08_03) represents (emphasis mine) “<strong>an</strong> absolute pathname of the current working directory.”

The specific value of `PWD` is important if the current working directory can be reached through multiple absolute paths, as is the case for subdirectories of `/tmp` on macOS. It affects the behavior of `os.Getwd` (see #8400), which can in turn affect both the error and non-error output of programs, including behaviors like paths in debug metadata (which can invalidate build caches if skewed) and parent-directory lookup (important for, among other things, identifying the current Go workspace and module). A `PWD` in `/tmp` arises naturally in any Go test that executes a subprocesses within a directory obtained by calling [`(*testing.T).TempDir`](https://pkg.go.dev/testing#T.TempDir), which is (or ought to be!) common for tests of command-line binaries. 

Failing to set `PWD` appropriately when setting the `Dir` has led to a number of subtle bugs within the Go project, such as:
* #33598 (“unexpected stale targets” on macOS)
* #43862 (unexpected output in `go:generate`)

Moreover, setting `PWD` correctly is not trivial: `PWD` is required to be absolute, but the `Dir` field may be relative, leading to bugs like #46832 when the two do not match.

### Proposal

I propose two ergonomic improvements to the `exec.Cmd` API:

1. If the `Env` field of an `exec.Cmd` is nil and its `Dir` field is non-empty on a platform that uses `PWD`, the subprocess's `PWD` variable should be implicitly set to an appropriate absolute path (computed from `os.Getwd()` if `Dir` is relative) when the command is started.
   * If the `Dir` field is empty, the `PWD` variable (or lack thereof) would continue to be inherited from the Go process, as it is today.
   * If the `Env` field is non-nil, its `PWD` variable (or lack thereof) would continue to be used, as it is today.

2. A new method, `(*Cmd).Environ`, analogous to `os.Environ()`, should return a copy of the environment that would be used by the command in its current configuration: either a copy of the current value of the `Env` field (if non-nil), or `os.Environ()` augmented with the `PWD` and/or `SYSTEMROOT` variables that would otherwise be used.

Part (1) alone would set a more appropriate `PWD` for existing commands that set `Dir` and do not explicitly modify the environment — that is, commands for which the author almost certainly hasn't considered the `PWD` interaction at all.

Part (2) would make it easier to set up a command that runs in a particular directory with a small number of overridden environment variables — the common case when environment variables other than `PWD` are changed at all.

### Compatibility

This proposal would set an updated `PWD` variable for some commands that today receive a stale one (or none at all) inherited from the parent Go process.

It would have no effect on commands that have an empty `Dir` field or a non-nil `Env` field.

It may change the observable behavior of commands that have a nil `Env` but are sensitive to the value of `PWD`, including commands that enumerate all variables in the environment. For commands that _are_ sensitive to the value of the `PWD` variable, it should nearly always be a strict improvement: the semantics of the `PWD` variable are explicitly described in the POSIX standard, and this change would bring the behavior in line with that standard on POSIX-like platforms.

The only case I can conceive of in which a user explicitly wants to inherit a missing or mismatched `PWD` is when testing the behavior of a command-line binary in a non-POSIX-compliant environment. However, for that rare case it would be straightforward for the user to explicitly set the `Env` field to a slice with the desired `PWD` variable, including no such variable at all.

### Limitations

This proposal would not fix the `PWD` variable for commands that explicitly set `Env` with an incorrect or missing `PWD` today (such as from an explicit call to `os.Environ()`). That is a deliberate choice to bias toward maintaining compatibility, but may limit the scope of improvements.

### Alternatives considered

* We could set the `PWD` variable more or less aggressively:
   a. We could omit the `PWD` from the command's environment if the Go process itself has no `PWD` variable, even if the platform normally uses `PWD`.
   b. We could set `PWD` (on platforms that use it) whenever `Dir` is non-empty and `Env` does not include an explicit entry for it, analogous to the conditions under which we set `SYSTEMROOT` on Windows today. That would fix commands that set explicit variables but accidentally omit `PWD`, but would remove the ability to deliberately leave `PWD` completely unset when using the `Dir` field. (At best, it would be set to the empty string.)
   c. We could set `PWD` (on platforms that use it) whenever `Dir` is non-empty and `Env` includes a `PWD` that is not an absolute path that resolves to `Dir`. That would enforce compliance with the POSIX standard for the variable, but may be expensive to detect, and would remove the ability to deliberately use a noncompliant `PWD`.

In my opinion, options (a) or (b) would be reasonable but (c) would be too invasive.

* Instead of the proposed `Environ` method, we could add a `SetDir` method that both sets the `Dir` field and appends an appropriate value to the `Env` field, populating the `Env` field using `os.Environ()` if it was previously nil.

I worry that appending to the existing `Env` field might be a bit too subtle: it wouldn't be intuitively obvious to me whether `SetDir` appends to `Env` (potentially overwriting entries in aliased slices), or to `Env[:len(Env):len(Env)]` (producing a possibly-unexpected new allocation). That could be addressed with documentation, but I think the `Environ` method is easier to describe, especially by analogy to `os.Environ`.

==== [Comments] ====

--- Comment #1 by rsc ---

This proposal has been added to the [active column](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#active) of the proposals project
and will now be reviewed at the weekly proposal review meetings.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #2 by bcmills ---
Neato! One more missed `PWD`, found via #50183. This one can cause `golang.org/dl/gotip` to report a misleading `GOROOT` if any component of `$HOME/sdk/gotip` is a symlink.
https://cs.opensource.google/go/dl/+/master:internal/version/gotip.go;l=149;drc=3c153da08ce00e975a6c64a0165ba8ab96081b22

--- Comment #3 by gopherbot ---
Change https://golang.org/cl/380503 mentions this issue: `internal/version: set GOROOT_FINAL and PWD in environments`

--- Comment #4 by rsc ---
This seems reasonable. It's unfortunate that sometimes we will have the wrong PWD inherited from constructs like

    cmd.Env = append(os.Environ(), "GOARCH=amd64")

but that's indistinguishable from really wanting to preserve PWD. So be it.

Those will just have to update to

    cmd.Env = append(cmd.Environ(), "GOARCH=amd64")




--- Comment #5 by rsc ---
Does anyone object to making this change?


--- Comment #6 by rsc ---

Based on the discussion above, this proposal seems like a **[likely accept](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#likely-accept)**.
— rsc for the proposal review group


--- Comment #7 by rsc ---

No change in consensus, so **[accepted](https://golang.org/s/proposal-status#accepted)**. 🎉
